Today we are starting a new series, I have spent quite a bit of time on this case because I wanted to answer this one simple question, was the torch slayer a serial killer? The basic definition of a Serial Killer is someone who commits a series of murders, often with no apparent motive and typically following a characteristic, predictable behavior pattern. Because of how things were handled, you probably never heard of the Torch Slayer, and if you had, you only knew of his one victim. But today, we are taking a deep dive into this crazy story.

This story first took place in February of 1928. A woman named Margaret Brown is getting ready to start a new chapter of her life. Little does she know, it’s the final chapter.

Hello everyone, and Welcome to was is officially known as season two of Forgotten True Crime. The Podcast where we investigate True Crime cases forgotten through time. We examine each crime independently of other people’s opinions. We search out prime sources through Police Records, Witness Statements, News Reports, and much more. Please subscribe to the Podcast so that you will be the first to know when we have new episodes. You can also check out our webpage at TrueCrime.Blog. There we post each story and some of the reports we gathered for each case. We have a Facebook and YouTube Page as well. You can find us under Forgotten True Crime.

Love can make a person do strange things. It blinds you to the obvious, like deceit, lies, and even… danger. Unfortunately for some, missing these warning signs can mean placing yourself in a perilous situation.


On February 21st, 1928. Enow Campbell was driving home in the early morning hours after a late evening out in Morristown, New Jersy with his Wife and Neighbor James Murdoch. Morristown was a nice and quiet community, so it was a surprise to everyone in that car when they saw something burning in the distance on the Morristown-Benardsville highway. Enow thought it might be one of the roadside stands that vendors set up and leave overnight. The flames were large enough that they thought it would be best to stop and see if they could assist in putting it out. It was near a gas station, and they didn’t want to think about the possibility it too caught fire.

As they approached, they discovered that the fire was behind a roadside stand and very close to the gas station. The fire appeared to be the ground, which was weird since fresh snow blanketed the city. Enow and James got out of the car, approached the fire, and were shocked to find that in the midding of the fire was actually a person engulfed in flames, not moving. Quickly, They tried to put the fire out, but nothing they did seemed to work. Finally, the two men started taking the snow and dousing the fire by covering the body. Now, Enow could smell gasoline and then realized that the person they found was soaked in it.

Just as James began saying that this was a horrible way for someone to die, the body of the chared person began to move and struggled to breathe. Both men realized that this poor person was still alive. It was then a police car pulled up.

Chief of Police Cavanaugh was alerted by a passerby about the fire. He was the first official to the scene, and the Chief approached the two men putting out the fire. They told him about what they had come across and that the person was still alive. Acting quickly, the three men brought the body to the police car and loaded it in the back seat. Enow got into his car to follow along, and James got in the back of the police car with the injured person. It was then he realized that the charred person was a woman.

They pulled back onto the road, and Enow drove as fast as he could on the ice-covered roads. The nearest hospital was not too far away, but to everyone’s horror, the woman again burst into flames that quickly spread over her clothes and body.

Chief Cavanaugh was forced to again pull over, and they pulled the woman out of the car. They once again put her out with snow, and when the flames were again extinguished, they put her back in the car. Now, James realized she didn’t seem to be breathing anymore.


When they reached the hospital, the staff tried to do what they could for the woman, but it was just too late. They pronounced her dead at 3AM, ending this woman’s final chapter in life but marking the beginning of a wild murder investigation.

The murder investigation was headed up by Chief Charles Cavanaugh and County Prosecutor Francis L Bergen. The unidentified woman’s body was now in the hand of Corner R.D. Totten. They first wanted to establish whether this woman had done this to herself or not. There was no mistaking what caused the fire. She was soaked in gasoline. The smell was potent. As Totten examined the body, he found nothing obvious that pointed out that she was injured before the fire. He also noted that she left her jewelry on, a 24 carrot watch. Her clothing was not cheap. She had a seal skin coat that looked like a custom order from a well-known furrier, Thomas Leous, but was marked “Louis from Buffalo” and not Leous Furrs.

The thing that looked very odd on the woman’s body was that it didn’t appear that she tried to put herself out or protect herself in any way. Even if you had done this on purpose, you would be in extreme pain and react. It looked like she didn’t move at all after the fire started. Her right arm was charred severely, along with her legs and the right side of her torso.

Thinking she had been drugged or something along those lines, Totten ordered that she have an autopsy done. He contacted the Somerville Hospital and set up an appointment with county physician George L. Mack in hopes that they could provide some answers.

Detectives took the items that may help identify the woman and began getting the word out about what happened. The first step was to alert the local news of the incident. The report itself may provide identification quicker than their own legwork. The second thing they did was they had officers in Buffalo, New York, visit Thomas Leous, who created the sealskin coat. They hoped he could shed some light on the woman’s identity by describing the tailored coat and the woman.

Thomas Leous welcomed the officers but could provide little information on who the woman may be. He had sold several coats like it, and the vague description of the woman was no help. But, Thomas had a well-organized list of clients who lived in the area. He gave the officers the names of his clients who lived in New Jersey in hopes that one of them might be able to identify the woman.

Chief Charles Cavanaugh and County Prosecutor Francis L Bergen searched for clues at the crime scene. Although this was a horrible thing that had happened, they did not know if she was murdered or if this was something she had done to herself. The Chief knew the corners theory that she was probably not conscious when she was set on fire, but now they were looking for hard evidence of that.


Near where she was found, there was a small gas station. That station had been closed at the time, and there was no way she would have been able to get gas from the pump. There was nothing around like matches, a lighter, or a container to hold gas in the area. But, what they did find were tire tracks leading up to the spot where she had been left. It looked like someone had simply pulled behind the building, pulled the woman out of a car, and then set her on fire.

Over the next 24 hours, police began to run down leads, look for witnesses and continue to identify the poor woman. As all of this was happening, the newspapers ran the story as front-page news. It was through these news articles that they received their first big tip, possible identification.

Miss Mary Brown, who resided in Fort Lee, New Jersey, was worried about her Aunt Margaret Brown. She was supposed to be going on a trip, but she had dropped all contact with the family after she had lunch with her sister-in-law.

The woman that Aunt Margaret worked for had called and asked if they had heard from Margaret. When Mary told her that she had not, the employer told Mary about a woman found dead in the paper. How the description reminded her of Margaret.

All of this worried Mary, but the thing that worried her the most was that she knew that Margaret was carrying around quite a bit of money. When she had lunch with her sister-in-law, Margaret said that she had just withdrawn nine thousand from her bank account. Which, in 1928, was the equivalent of having over a hundred and fifty thousand dollars.

So Mary Brown phoned the police and talked to Detective Fred Roff. They went over identifying marks that were known to have been on Margaret Brown, and one such mark was a surgery scar she had on her torso. Detective Roff checked the body; sure enough, there was a surgery scar just as described.

The Detective described the clothing that the victim had on. Each article was confirmed to have been something Margaret had owned. So the Detective asked Mary if she would come down to the station and make a formal identification, even though they were pretty sure who the woman was now. She agreed to come down the next day by police escort.


Margaret Brown
Before hanging up, Detective Roff asked what it was that Margaret did for a living. Mary told the Detective that she was a woman of means. She had money but wanted to work for something to do with her life. She had obtained a job as a governess and was working for the Gillespie family. She had been employed with them for nine months.

Detectives discovered that the Gillespie’s, who Margaret worked for, were wealthy. They lived in New York on Park Avenue. Working as a governess for them meant receiving many perks of living wealthy. When interviewed, Mr. and Mrs. stated that Margaret liked going to Central Park in her free time. They believed that she had met someone and was planning on going away with him soon. From what Margaret told the family, she planned to go to California soon.

All of this was news to the Detectives. They had heard from the family that she was planning on going to Florida, but not California. The day prior, Margaret had left their employment under excellent terms to pursue a life of her own. So the Detectives asked about the amount of money Margaret had on her when she left their employment, and they told the Detective that they were not quite sure. Mrs. Gillespie knew she had little to travel with but was unsure of the amount. He told her they believed she had eight thousand on her at the time of her death, and the Gillespie’s seemed generally shocked that she was carrying around that much money. She then told the Detectives that she had talked about a man who came to see her, he was believed to be a Doctor and his name was Huff or Hoff.

Detectives were also told that when Margaret Brown left her employment, she took with her a trunk, something that was not with her now. She had received mail several times at her place of employment, and as far as they knew, she never threw away those letters or burned them, which was a common practice at this time.

As the news broke that named Margaret Brown was the probable victim, reports began to filter in about Margaret and what may have happened to her. While she lived in New York and in the employment of the Gillespie’s, Margaret was seen several times talking to a man around central park. He was described as a little younger, and he seemed quite taken with Margaret. But because of her private nature, no one knew his name, and they only had vague descriptions of him and of the car that he drove. What they were able to piece together was that he drove a blue sedan. A blue sedan was also reported to have been seen in the area the night of the fire.

With little to go on, Detectives returned to search for the blue sedan or a Doctor Huff. The next day, a letter arrived at the police station through the morning post. The clerk believed that it was just an ordinary letter and opened it. Two one thousand dollar bonds fell out onto the desk, along with a full confession letter. The letter read…

“I am writing you this letter and sending you these bonds of Miss Brown, knowing you will take care of them before anyone else gets them. I am very remorseful. I had been drinking.”

“I met Miss Brown in Buffalo and then again in Newark at 4:15 on Monday and reached New York at 7:15 and met Miss Brown. I had two bottles of wine, and we both drank some.

“I drove out to Lovers Lane, where there was a large car parked. I drove around until the car had gone, and then I pulled up there. I tried to take advantage of her, but she refused. I hit her on the head, and she fell. Thinking I had killed her, I took gasoline from my car and poured it over it, lighting it, and then drove away.”

“I drove through Bernardsville, where I threw the rest of the stuff in the river as this was all the money she had, and I drove around and slept in the car the rest of the night.”

“I drove to Newark the next morning, where I am in hiding. I have a good car and new tires, and I am signing out, god knows where, to hell, I suppose. By the time you get this letter, I shall have a good start on you. I am going to go until my money gives out, and then when I am caught, I have something with me to end it all before they can do anything.”

The clerk rushed the letter to the Detectives; this might contain a clue that they need to break this case.


Some of the detectives on the case thought this letter was not written by someone who was well educated. But as they interviewed those who knew the victim, they were told that Margaret was seeing a Doctor from New York. Although not many knew his name, except for one friend and fellow governess, Miss Elizabeth Emily Miller. Miss Miller not only knew the name of the Doctor that Margaret was seeing, but she had seen him in passing and knew what he looked like.

Miss Miller told the Detectives that the man they were looking for was Dr. Louis Clement. He resided and practiced in New York, and he met Margaret through personals in the paper. They had fallen in love, and they planned on getting married. This was interesting to the police because this is something they did not publish in the confession letter; they held it back, so it was not common knowledge.


In the letter, the killer explains that he and Margaret Brown were to be married. But on the night of the murder, she had told him she no longer wished to marry. He tried to convince her otherwise, but she refused to change her mind. That is what caused him to snap, ultimately leading to the murder.

Now, this information came just days after the murder. Keep in mind that this is days after not having any actual solid leads, and this is front-page news across the country. So when Officers and Detectives got the name of the person they thought might have caused the murder, they let part of that information leak.

Detectives in New Jersey contacted Officers in New York and informed them of the information they had received. New York officials began to quickly look for Dr. Clement. The first place they checked was his home. But when they arrived, they found that not only was Dr. Clement not living there, but he had been thrown out by his wife. Dr. Clement was married.

Detectives sat down with Mrs. Theresa Flower Van Norden, the Doctor’s wife, and explained the situation. She and Dr. Clement had married after 6 months of dating. After they married, the Doctor decided to steal a diamond broach worth over six hundred dollars. After he stole it, she had not seen him since. When the Detectives told her why they were looking for her husband, she told them they had the wrong guy. He was a thief, not a killer. But she did tell them where she believed he could be found. He may be staying at one of several hotels downtown, but she didn’t know what he was doing for work.

Despite what they were told, Detectives in New York stationed themselves in local hotels and areas where they were told that Dr. Clement frequented. They also let it slip to the press that they were on the verge of catching the killer. Officers said they were watching the killer and waiting to make their move. The truth was that they were where they only believed he would be, Officers didn’t know where the Doctor was, and as each hour went by, they started feeling the weight of their statements returning to haunt them.

This frustrated officers from both New Jersey and New York. Many didn’t believe that they should have given such a statement to the press and that it created this false sense of security in the general public. The fact was that if Dr. Clement was the killer and wanted to kill again, no one was watching him to stop him. Furthermore, they were also going off of one person’s statement that he was indeed the person who was seeing Margaret.

Despite their frustrations, On Feb 24th, 1928, Detectives in New Jersey started telling the press that the killer was a drug fiend. They based this on the information that he had stolen the diamond broach from his wife. Their thinking was that he would only do that because he wanted to sell it or trade it for drugs. They also let it be known that when the killer was caught, everyone would be shocked when they found out who the individual was.

In my opinion, this was a careless tactic, but it was the type of thing you might expect between two state police forces who were not working well with each other. In New Jersey and New York, this free-flowing information was always making its way to the press. Officers and Detectives commonly fed them information because those news articles sometimes helped solve the crime or find the killer. The Newspapers may have been offering rewards for information as well, so there might have been money to be made by passing out information. Everyone wanted the scoop first.

It was also during this time that the police were starting to run down every lead that they had come their way. They were desperate to get this solved and would take any information that they could get. A man in New Jersey near where the murder took place had committed suicide, which caused the authorities to investigate if he was the killer or not. In the confession letter, the killer threatened to end things before he got caught. But when they looked into the man’s life, they knew he had nothing to do with it.

On May 1st, just 8 days after the murder, the Detectives decided to take the suspect’s name to the news media. They had lost his trail, and after days of trying to find him, they were running out of leads fast. The fact of the matter was that they were spending all of their time looking for this one person. They were not sure if he had anything to do with this murder or not. But the more time they spent running down this one lead, the more they got tunnel vision and lost sight of all other possible leads. So by the end of the day, the name Dr. Louis Clement was plastered on the front of every major newspaper in the northeast united states.

When the nation read about Dr. Clement, information about him started to spill into the media about his personal life and dealings in the past. Nothing painted him in a positive light. He once swindled two women out of thousands of dollars when he promised them that he was developing a new type of fuel, something that was going to change the world. They invested in his idea. He took their money and ran.

As the days went on, the police and public continued searching for the Doctor. He was reported to have been spotted all over the country and was instantly everywhere and nowhere. Detectives continued to zero in on the Dr. as their primary suspect. They took the written confession letter and compared it to other known letters that Dr. Clement had written. It was the opinion of the detectives that the two letters were written by the same person. This was damming evidence and was the first thing, physically, that they possessed that linked the Doctor to the killer.

On Mar 5th, a new letter arrived at the police station. This one was addressed by Dr. Louis Clement. The letter was mailed two days earlier, on Saturday, Mar 3rd. The letter says that he has been making no effort to avoid the police and that he would have visited police headquarters but for the fact that he is penniless and cannot afford to retain anyone to represent him or protect his interest. He went on to state that he had no car and didn’t know how to drive if he had one. The Doctor went on to explain that on Sunday, Feb 20th, he had dinner with friends here in the city and if the authorities have not found the address of this friend precious to the receipt of this letter, I shall be glad to furnish his name and address. He stated that he could provide proof that he had not been out of New York since Thanksgiving Day in 1927.

If the contents of this letter were true, it would mean that the Doctor had fallen on hard times and had nothing to do with the murder in the first place. This would mean that they had been searching for this single person with no other suspect in sight for weeks, and if he was not the killer, then they had gone down a road where there was really no coming back from.

On Mar 6th, a man walked into a New York City police station and told the clerk that he wanted to speak to whoever was in charge. The clerk asked who the man was, and he told him that he would not give up his idenity to anyone, except to whoever was in charge. So the clerk went and retrieved the department chief, who too asked the man for his name. He stated that he was Dr. Clement, the man they were looking for. At once, the Chief brought Dr. Clement into an interrogation room, and they started questioning him about his possible involvement in the murder.

The questioning went on for hours and hours. Dr. Clement was steadfast in his stance that he had nothing to do with the murder and that he didn’t know the victim. Dr. Clement worked in a restaurant in New York on the day in question. He worked late and was not only seen by his coworkers but by the many customers as well. The distance from his work to the murder scene was just too far. There was no way the Doctor could have been at both places.


Miss Elizabeth Emily Miller was shown a photo of Dr. Clement and how he looked now, and at once, she dismissed it. Miss Miller said that there was no way this was the person that Margaret was seeing and was not the person she saw her with. The person she saw said he was Dr. Clement, but obviously, he was not telling the truth.

Dr. Clement was arrested, but not for murder. He was charged for the diamond broach he stole from his wife. She valued it at $600.00, but Dr. Clement said it was worth much less than that.

Because there was little else followed up on, all other leads came up cold. Because of her private nature, Margaret didn’t give much insight into her private life and made it very hard for anyone to identify who the man she was seeing was. There were reports that he was younger or older than she was. Many of the reports stated that he was a thin man. But I am not blaming the victim in any way for her death. I’m just saying that it made things hard for the investigation.

Its not uncommon for police in this era to get tunnel vision and to ignore everything except for one lead. This is something that Detectives and Police train to prevent in today’s world. But in this case, this was a perfect storm that offset the investigation no matter what. It was odd to police that the Doctor had seemingly disappeared when they were looking for him. They didn’t take into account that he was just another person who had fallen on hard times and was trying to make ends meet.

As the days and weeks went by, the news of Margaret Brown and in the investigation into her death went to the wayside. New investigations that had not gone cold ended up taking presentence, and her murder was little mentioned in the paper again… until that is… another murder took place.

On what is almost the first anniversary of Margaret Brown’s murder, another practically identical murder occurred. A woman is killed and burned in the snow. This time, police are hot on his trail. Will the killer get away with it again?

In April of 1922, in a small corner of the Bronx in New York. There were curious questions about what might have happened to Mrs. Jennie Becker. A hardworking stay-at-home mother of four who fiercely loved her children. On April 6th, she and her husband, Abraham Becker, had attended a party together. On April 7th, Abraham was telling friends and family that Jennie had left with another man. She left her husband, kids, and life for a mystery man. She was never seen alive again. Was this a love triangle gone wrong, or is there something more sinister about? Let’s go over the case.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Youtube and Facebook pages “Forgotten True Crime.” Visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post many cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “Seven Feet Deep,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out. The links to all that are in the description below.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Today’s story was one that I waited on telling for a while. I waited on this one because we had to make a few purchases for documents and information that goes along with this case. What we found was some really great stuff and amazing insight on what it really took to investigate this case in the 1920s. You have to remember that everyone that had anything to do with cases that are a hundred years old like this one, there’s no one alive that had anything to do with this case. So it is lovely to go through things like notes or documents that show the reasoning behind things.

But, let us start where this story begins, which is oddly enough, 7 months after Jennie left Abraham. Letters began showing up in mailboxes, all around the area where Jennie Becker once lived. They were from her mother, who lived in England. Jennie’s mother was worried because she had not heard from her daughter since April. It was not like her to drop all contact, and she feared that something had happened to Jennie.

By this time, the news of Jennie leaving Abraham was less of a shock than it first was. Everyone knew that Abraham was a hard man to deal with and if Jennie chose to fall in love and run away with someone else, then who’s to blame her?

But the one thing that always bothered one neighbor, Mrs. Rebecca Baldwin, the most was why on earth did Jennie leave her children behind? Abraham was not a caretaker. He was the type of man who always thought about himself. When it came to taking care of their four children alone, he had them committed to an asylum instead of taking care of them himself. Their children, 8-year-old Harry and 9-year-old Alek, were placed in the Hebrew Orphan Asylum after Jennie had left.

Now the Hebrew Orphan Asylum sounds like an awful place. I did some research and found that back in the early 1900’s, the Hebrew Orphan Asylum was always filled with thousands of children, and they had little to care for them all. Very few children were adopted because they were children from one-parent homes. Their mother or father couldn’t care for them, so they took them to the Hebrew Orphan Asylum and used it as a boarding school.

Mrs. Rebecca Baldwin refused to accept that Jennie would leave her children with their father. She knew that Jennie’s disappearance was not news to the Police. Jennie’s Husband, Abraham (Who everyone called Abe), went to the police just days after Jennie left, and he reported her missing. They all believed the story that she had left with another man. So Rebecca did something that not a lot of people would do at the time. She named herself the Detective on the case.

Shortly after Jennie was reported missing, Rebecca began talking to friends and neighbors about what they knew of the situation. She wrote down everyone’s statements word for word. She asked how they came to know that Jennie had left Abe, and they all had the same answer, Abe told them. But it was what he said to them that didn’t make any sense. Some of the neighbors said that Abe said to them that Jennie had left with another man at the April 6th party. Others stated that it was after the party that Abe said that she had left. Others who spoke to Abe on the morning of the 7th state that Abe claimed that he got rid of his wife.

Rebecca knew that Jennie was a devoted mother. There were times in the past when Abe would have mishandled the family’s account or wasn’t there altogether, and they had no money for food. Jennie would go out and beg for food for their children so that they didn’t go hungry. It’s just what a loving mother would do.

In the months after Jennie had disappeared, Abe then brought another woman into his house. Anna Elias, who was a beautiful 24-year-old woman, restarted a relationship with Abe. Yes, I said restarted. Yo u see, in 1920, Abe left Jennie for Anna. He and Anna were having a baby together, and he wanted to marry her. The only problem was that he was still married to Jennie. When the two couldn’t wed, that is when Anna found out that the man that she had been spending all this time with was a married man. He had never told her about Jennie or his children. Anna told Abe that there was no way she would live a life with a married man. If he was ever single, they might try again. Abe then returned to Jennie, who let him back into the home. Partly because she loved him and party because they needed the income in the house to help feed the children.

Rebecca Baldwin wrote every little detail down. She marked the day that Anna started living with Abe, and she continued to wait for the day she received a little more evidence, and then she would go to the Police. Rebecca looked for any signs of Jennie, where she supposedly went to go live with this unnamed mystery man, but never found her. But it was when she received the letter from Jennie’s mother, who so desperately wanted to see her daughter, that she decided to take what she knew to the Police and hope that someone would listen.

When Rebecca walked into the police station, officers treated her very skeptically. Although they reported Jennie’s disappearance, they had largely forgotten about it. It wasn’t until District Attorney Edward J. Glennon and Assistant District Attorney Albert Cohn sat down with Rebecca that they started putting the pieces together. Rebecca was able to outline the entire timeline of events. She handed Edward the many different statements that Abe gave the neighbors, and she even included the names and addresses of everyone. She then told them about the state of the children and that Abe had been living with Anna almost as soon as Jennie was out of the picture.

At the behest of District Attorney Edward Glennon, Officers in the Bronx quickly moved in on Abe’s home and arrested him. Several Detectives then started moving in with copies of the names and addresses of the neighbors who gave statements to Rebecca. They wanted to back up her claims with the same evidence to make sure that everything she presented them with was on the up and up.

Slowly but surely, they found that everything that Rebecca gave them was the truth. I can’t state this enough. What Rebecca Baldwin did for this case was nothing short of amazing. The Detectives on the case said that her work was better than most detectives. I’m surprised they didn’t offer her a job.

With witness statements in hand, District Attorney Edward Glennon decided that it was time to confront Abraham Becker. Abe was a calm person, he didn’t let a lot get to him, and it was this cool and calm deminer that really made things difficult when interviewing him. He flat out refused to acknowledge that anything might have happened to his wife. He told officers that she had left with another man and that he didn’t really know where she was at this moment.

The District Attorney pressed Abe for information on his movements on April 7th, the day after the party. Abe thought about it for a moment and then began to tell them about that day. He stated that it started just like his other workdays. He got up and ready for work. He was a truck driver, and he started his workday at 7:45 in the morning. It wasn’t until that afternoon that he discovered that Jennie was missing. He reported his disappearance to the Police, but he received a letter from her some days later stating that she had moved to Philadelphia.

At this moment, District Attorney Edward Glennon began to suspect that Jennie might no longer be living. You see, Abe had just contradicted some of the witnesses. One witness, Harry Simonowitz, stated that he ran into Abe on the morning of the 7th. Abe was in a great mood and told Harry, “Congratulate me! I got rid of my wife!” At the time, Harry thought it was funny, kinda dark humor. He believed the story that Jennie had left Abe… that was until the rumors started going around town.

Abe denied any involvement in Jennie’s disappearance. He wanted to disprove what others were saying about him, so he told officers about his friend that he had seen that day to back up his statement. He told the officers that they needed to speak to Reuben Norkin and that he would set them straight. On the night that Jennie supposedly disappeared, he told the officers that he was with Reuben, although he couldn’t give them a real answer as to why he was with him. Reuben had an auto shop and dump. The officers asked if there was something wrong with Abe’s car, but he told them no, but he did tell them that he brought his trash to Reuben’s dump regularly.

The District Attorney felt as if he had enough to hold Abe on suspicion. They brought him in front of a judge who assigned a 10 thousand dollar bail, and they then locked him up in the Bronx County Jail. The most interesting thing about this was that few guards patrolled the corridors of this part of the jail. So the inmates spoke freely about their crimes and what they were accused of. When Abe was placed in his cell, he was pestered into telling them why he was there. Abe told the other inmates that they were looking for his wife. They asked what happened to her, and he shied away from saying anything until he heard others talk about their crimes. So he finally spoke up when asked again what happened to his wife. All he would say was, “The Police will never find her. I hid her away and they won’t be able to find her.” Abe then asked how he could get a message out. He needed to contact a friend, Reuben Norkin, and get a message to him. The inmates asked who he was, but Abe stopped talking when they didn’t tell him how to contact his friend.

The thing that Abe didn’t realize was that every inmate around his cell was police officers. They went undercover thinking that Abe would do something stupid and freely talk about his involvement in his wife’s disappearance. They also had a stenographer in a cell next to him taking down his statement, word for word. They now knew two major things. One was that Reuben Norkin was someone they needed to talk to and that they thought that the visit he had on the night of Jennie’s disappearance at Reuben’s shop might be the key to the whole thing.

Officers were dispatched to Reuben Norkin’s shop. They brought him in for questioning without any resistance. Reuben was a little like Abe, calm, cool, and collected. But when they got him into the station, Detective James McCarton thought that Reuben’s deminer was all an act. All day and overnight, they questioned Reuben about what he knew about Jennie and Abe. At first, he acted indifferently. He would say things like “What do I care what happened to her?” or “If Abe killed her, what does that have to do with me?”

As the hours went by, Reuben Norkin slowly started saying more and more. He still denied having anything to do with Jennie’s disappearance. But he let on that if they were looking for her, they should perhaps start digging in the dump around his shop.

Right away, Detective James McCarton took Reuben to his shop, and then they walked out into the dump. Soon several officers showed up as well, all with shovels and ready to dig. Detective McCarton looked to Reuben and asked, “Where do we dig?” Reuben then looked around and led them to a spot. They started to dig, but it wasn’t long before they stopped. They knew that this was not the right spot. The dirt was packed and had clearly been undisturbed for some time. The Detective then began to walk around the dump and nearer still to the sidewalk and building. He probed the ground with a stick to see how soft it was. When the stick went in with little trouble, the Detective looked to Reuben. Before he could even ask if this were the spot, he saw the look on Reuben’s face. He was pale and looked horrified. They didn’t need to ask him anything more. The officers began digging down. As time went on, more and more people gathered along the sidewalk to see what was happening. Newspapermen, who had been tipped off to the story, snapped pictures as they dug deeper and deeper. Hours later, they had reached nearly 7 feet into the earth and moved out several large rocks from the pit. It was then they found a badly decomposed body.

Detective James McCarton believed that they had just found poor Jennie. They had got this far in the case thanks to one Detective that refused to quit, Mrs. Rebecca Baldwin. Although she was not on the Police’s payroll, she was probably one of the best Detectives in town. I wish we were all so lucky to have a friend like Rebecca in our lives. She refused to believe that her friend and neighbor would leave her family overnight unless something horrible happened to her. Rebecca stuck to her gut feelings and let the evidence lead her to the truth. Justice for Jennie was only happening because Rebecca stepped in.

The main questions we have at this point are, the body they found, was it Jennie’s? How did Reuben Norkin know where the body was buried? The Detectives still haven’t interviewed Anna Elias. Did she have more to do with this than previously thought?

Join us next time to finish “Seven feet Deep” with part two of this story. You won’t believe its outcome.

In 1909, Kate Teal was described as quite the character. She lived in St. Louis, Missouri, in a house that was divided into several apartments. The room that she rented was in the rear of the house on the second floor. This room was somewhat desirable because it had a short balcony attached to it.

Mrs. Teal was well known in town as quite the drinker. She lived where she did because there was a Slevers saloon just across the street. She would go over to the Saloon several times a day and fill her bucket with beer. Then she would carefully carry her bucket back to her room to spend the next couple of hours drinking. Once the bucket was empty, she would return to the Saloon to fill her bucket again.

A few months before this, Mrs. Teal would be joined at the hip by her husband, Samuel Teal. They loved each other as about as much as they loved drinking. Sam was quite a bit older than Kate, and he died of natural causes. Distraught, Kate propped Sam up in a chair next to a fire and then put herself in a 4-day drunk stooper before reporting her husband’s death. She told officers then that she knew that he would be buried in a potter’s field and that it really bothered her.

If you don’t know what a potter field is, then that’s ok. A quick explanation would be that it’s a place where a city or county would bury someone with no money. It was done at the city or county’s expense, which was done very cheaply.

After her husband’s death, Kate’s main companionship came from two small dogs that she had taken in. They were both very noisy, and she let a friend take one of them. The other was a small brown dog that she loved very much, despite how loud the dog constantly was.

Now, we already established that Kate was quite the drinker. So on Friday, June 4th, 1909, when Kate failed to come out of her room to go and get a drink at the Saloon, Mary Lucka, who lived across the hall, became worried. Kate’s dog had been barking nonstop all night and now all day, and there were no signs that Kate had been up and out. So Mary knocked on Kate’s door. She waited for an answer and got none except the now very excited barking from the small dog. Mary then tried to enter the room, but the door was locked.

So Mary decided that she would try another tactic. Next door to Kate’s room was a vacant room. It was unlocked. She entered that room and then went out on its balcony, which was connected to Kate’s balcony.

She climbed over the small railing that separated the two balconies, and she then went over and peered through the window into Kate’s room. What she saw, she would never forget.

Kate was in bed, face-up, and was a bloody mess. She was obviously dead, and Mary ran to alert the police.

When officers arrived, it was Sergeant Smith with the St. Louis Police Department who was the lead detective on the case. He tried to enter through the bedroom door but still found it locked. He then forced his way into the room and was immediately attacked by Mrs. Kate’s small brown dog. Sergeant Smith took out his baton and hit the dog hard enough to cause it to yelp and flee from the officer. It took refuge under the bed, where Mrs. Kate Teal was lying dead.

The room was a complete mess. The contents of the closet were pulled out, and there was refuse all over the room. Mrs. Kate was lying face-up on her bed. She was covered in blood and was clutching a butcher knife. It first entered the officer’s mind that Kate might have taken her own life, but upon further investigation, he noticed that the blood was coming from two stab wounds that were very narrow, not large like the butcher knife was. Also, the butcher knife was clean. Not a drop of blood was on it.

Kate’s body was taken to the morgue, where it would be examined by a corner’s jury. These typically comprised of several doctors who would all independently come up with the cause of death and then, in some cases, place the blame on a suspect in the case. Unlike a trial jury, their decision was based purely on what they thought happened and didn’t hear arguments from both sides of the case.

From the state of the room, Sergeant Smith didn’t believe that this was a robbery. It was apparent from the state of the room that Kate didn’t have much. But, he also noted that the room appeared to have been searched.

The other tenants in the home were Mary Lucka, Mike Machenicka, and 12-year-old Eva Dayton. They and their families who lived in the home were all arrested and brought to the police station for questioning.

By the time they got everyone to the station, officers had learned that Kate Teal had been dead for about 36 hours. This put her death around the early morning hours of Thursday, probably sometime just after midnight.

They separated everyone and then questioned them one by one. Officers soon learned that Mrs. Kate’s dog had been barking almost nonstop since Thursday. They paid it little mind because the dog was very energetic and would bark at the littlest things.

On Wednesday evening, the night before the murder. Three witnesses walked by Mrs. Kate’s room. The door was open, and they all stated that they saw Kate’s friend, John Deborta, sitting with her, and they were drinking beer out of a blue bucket. The bucket was noticeable because it was not the same bucket that Kate typically carried around and drank from.

The Three witnesses were Mary Lucka, Mike Machenicka, and 12-year-old Eva Dayton. Eva was the most notable of the witnesses, not just from her age, but she knew John personally and would have recognized him when she saw him.

Officers searched the other tenant’s rooms and found nothing that connected them to the crime. One of the things they were looking for was a cufflink. They found a gold cufflink in Mrs. Kate’s room, thought to have been dropped by the killer. They sought for its pair as a way of identifying who the killer was. When they found nothing that linked them to the crime, they let the tenants go.

At this point, Officers learned more about the weapon used to kill Mrs. Kate. It was a very unique knife, about one inch in diameter and twelve inches long. Imagine a knife with a blade the length of a standard ruler. It was that long. In these times, knives like these were typically found in animal processing jobs. They were called killing knives because they were long and very sharp and used in the killing process of the animal.

Kate had two stab wounds, one through her eye that went through her brain, the other was in her side that went through her lungs and pierced her heart, killing her very quickly. They finally ruled out suicide as a possibility when the corner made this statement.


The Corner Statment
The officer’s next stop was to see 24-year-old John Deborta. John worked at the Tamm Brothers Glue Factory. Now, when I heard glue factory, my ears perked up. Glue has been commonly made from animal parts, especially horses. I did some research on the history of the Tamm Brothers Glue Factory but never discovered the type of glue they made, and I learned that there was just as easy of a chance that the glue they made was not from animals. The glue factory adjoined the house where Kate was living and had been murdered in.

Officers visited and questioned John Deborta for some time at his house. He denied any wrongdoing and was actually surprised to hear of Kate’s murder. Officers searched his home and found a coat with some stains on the sleeves. They thought it might be blood. They then found the blue bucket that 12-year-old Eva Dayton described. They took it and the stained jacket as evidence and arrested John on the spot.

A second suspect was also arrested. A man by the name of Charles Alwens was also taken into custody when he was reported to have been telling people around town about the amount of money that was in Mrs. Kate’s room. Townsfolk thought this to be suspicious and turned him in. When interviewed, they found out that Charles, who was a porter for the Saloon that Kate frequented, did a job for her three weeks before she was murdered. She needed a screen door hung, and she paid him to do it for her. When she paid him, he swore she pulled out several large bills out of a jar and silver. She paid him what was owed, and then she put it back from where she got it.

Charles had a pretty solid alibi for his whereabouts at the time of the murder, so he was not really a suspect when this was found out. But they wanted to know if he told anyone about this money that he saw, and he told officers that he did not. But Charles let the police know who did know about the money, and they told anyone who would listen… it was Kate herself. Before her murder, Kate spent her time when not drinking, talking about herself and how much money she had. Detectives always believed that this was a lie because she used a watch that was handed down to her as collateral for loans all the time. She often pawned the watch to make ends meet. Also, the main source of income was from her wealthy brother. He sent her money to keep her going, and he never sent her more than what she needed because he knew she would just spend it at the Saloon. Many others around town would come forward to say that Kate told them that she had a lot of money.

Days after the discovery of the body, police let John Deborta go. It was found that the stains on his jacket were not blood and that being in the room hours before the murder didn’t equate him as the murderer. Now when researching this case, I looked to see if John Deborta had ever been arrested after this, and someone by the same name was arrested over 20 years later in Iowa. But upon further investigation, I found that it was not the same John Deborta. This person was a lot younger and spent a lot of time in and out of jail.

This case would be continued to be investigated, but it was never solved. Personally, I think that Kate might have brought on her own demise if she was going around town telling others that she had a lot of money.

This is where we conclude the story and start giving our opinion. We can brag about this case and talk about how we are the only ones covering it, or we might have an inside look into the topic.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post many cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Intruder,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out. You can also follow me on Facebook under Trevor Shelby. The link is in the description below. You can see what trouble I’ve been getting into and what I’m currently working on.  

 Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised. 

Welcome everyone to the show. It’s good to be here. We are in the month of February, the month of love! We decided to start an annual event called “Be Mine.” This will feature true crime stories of love and loss. Many of these stories do not feature a happily ever after, but rather full of misery forevermore.  

This is also a very unique case. I won’t give anything away here before we tell the story, but just know that I really enjoyed researching this story. We will talk more about its uniqueness a little while later. But, for now, sit back and enjoy the story of “The Intruder.”

Ruth Brown was born in New York in 1895. She was a focused young woman, wanting to succeed in life. Ruth decided that it would be best for her to drop out of school in the eighth grade and take a job at the telephone company instead. Discovering that not all jobs would lead her to the success that she was looking for, she decided to focus on learning shorthand and typing so that she could get a job in an office somewhere. You see, for Ruth, Success was not all about where you were in your job or how much you were making. It was about finding true love and starting a family.  

So in 1914, at 19 years old, Ruth was able to secure a job at Motor Boating magazine. That is where she met a handsome man named Albert Snyder. He was 32 years old and very focused on his career. That was until he met Ruth because, after that chance meeting, he started to focus on her. Even though he was older, Ruth didn’t seem to mind at all. Albert was a gentleman, and soon, they were spending all of their time together. In 1915 they decided to get married. Three years later, their daughter Lorraine was born.  

Albert was very focused on his job. He was successful and provided well for his family. They bought a beautiful home in Queens, New York. But this didn’t mean he was the best spouse in town either. Albert had his own idea of what success was, and much of it involved his job and making money. By some reports, people found Albert challenging to work with because he was a no-nonsince person. But he loved his family and did his best to provide for them. 

On March 20th, 1927, Albert and Ruth attended a party. Albert was not the party type and didn’t really want to be there. The party was something that was more Ruth’s style. They left the party late into the night and arrived home at about 1:30 in the morning. Hours later, little Lorraine Snyder came fleeing from their home. She ran to a neighbors house, telling them that someone had attacked their family.  

After altering the Police, Neighbor, Louis Mailhauser ran to the Snyder residence. The front door was open, and he went inside. There he found Mrs. Snyder at the foot of the stairs. Her legs were bound with rope, and she struggled to stay conscious. Mr. Mailhauser worked to free her from the bindings and then carried her to the nearby bedroom. But there, covered in a blanket, he found Albert Snyder dead. Albert was face down on the bed. A pistol was lying beside him.  

It didn’t take long for the Police to arrive at the crime scene. What they found was total chaos. Upon entering the home, they found that it had been trashed. Ruth was downstairs, away from her husband, and Mr. Mailhauser comforted her. They first talked to Mr. Mailhauser, who told them what he knew of what happened, how their little girl came running to their home, and how he ran over to see what was going on.  

The New York City Police Commissioner George Vincent McLaughlin took a particular interest in this case. He arrived at the Murder Scene a little after the Police did, and he began to interview Ruth. This is her exact statement, word for word, as recorded by the Daily News. 

“We had been to a party at the home if Mr. and Mrs. William Fidgeon, 8935 Hollis Court blvd, Queens. We had a great time, and we drank quite a bit. we got home about 1:30 in the morning. I went upstairs to my room while Albert drove the car to the back. The front door was open for about five minutes.”

“We have separate rooms. Some little time after I went to bed, I got up. I thought I heard Loraine calling. Lorraine is our daughter. She’s 9. As I stepped out of my room and went toward her room, I passed another room, the room where my Mother stays when she is with us. A man came out of that room and hit me on the head. I believe that I heard him call to someone downstairs down below.”

“It was about 8 o’clock when I awoke. I was stiff and strained. Bound and gagged. I had a hard time taking the ropes off my hands. Then I took the gag out of my mouth and tried to scream.” 

After she started screaming, that is when little Lorraine was woken up and came out of her room. She not only found her Mother tied up and on the floor, but she found her father dead in bed. That is when she fled from the home, not knowing if the attackers were still in the home, and ran to Mr. Mailhauser’s house.  

Ruth was able to give a vague description of the man who attacked her. He had a long black mustache, a black slouch hat and spoke broken English. She never saw the other man.  

The Commissioner then went to look at the body of Albert Snyder. It was not a pretty scene. The mattress was soaked with blood. His head looked like it had been beaten with something heavy, and picture wire was used to strangle him. It was pulled so tight it had cut into his throat. It was not a pleasant scene. His pockets were pulled inside out as if someone had searched them.  

The Commissioner went back to Ruth and asked if Mr. Snyder had any money on him. She thought about it and told the Commissioner that her husband withdrew over a hundred dollars, and he would have had that on him.  

Getting the idea that this was a robbery gone wrong, the Commissioner led Ruth around the home. He had her identify valuables that were missing from the house. She very quickly noticed some jewels, a bracelet, and three rings were missing from her jewelry box. She was also missing a costly fur coat. 

One of the things that bothered the Commissioner about the crime scene was that he believed the robber was not a professional. Yes, it appeared that he had gone for the jewelry, something small and hard to track. But they also pulled out all the drawers in the kitchen, which would be very loud and would have little to no profit.  

The Commissioner had more questions for Ruth and her Daughter, but they needed to move the body of Alber Snyder. Instead of having them at the home when this was performed, they decided to finish the interview at the police station. As they went to leave, reporters had already caught wind of what was going on and had also arrived at the home. They asked if Ruth was under arrest and the Commissioner reassured them that she was coming for questioning only and that she was not a suspect. He also described the man Ruth saw attack her so that it would be reported in the papers and the community could be on the lookout.  

When Ruth and Lorraine arrived at the police station, they separated them to give their official statements to the Detectives. By the time they were both done, the Commissioner had received a curious report about the crime scene. All of the things that Ruth had noticed were missing were found while the Police searched the home, were found. The curious part was where the items were found, under Ruth’s mattress. It was at this point the Commissioner started seeing Ruth in a new light.  

Before they questioned Ruth about this, they first went to talk to 9-year-old Lorraine. They asked her if her parents ever fought. She told them that they fought all the time.  

Commissioner McLaughlin let his Detectives know that they should start looking into the possibility that Mrs. Ruth Snyder might have something to do with her husband’s death. So they started searching the home with this in mind. He also didn’t want them to zero on her as a suspect without checking their leads. So he also sent Detectives to Mr. and Mrs. William Fidgeon’s house to see what they knew. They are the ones who held the party that the Snyders were at the night of the murder. They might have more insight into what may have happened.  

When the Detectives arrived at the Fidgeon residence, they questioned them both to see what happened at that party. Mr. Fidgeon told the detectives that it was a pretty uneventful night. They played cards and held these parties regularly. Mrs. Fidgeon went to school with Ruth, and they were very close friends. Albert was not a fan of their parties, and it was well known that he didn’t really want to be there, but Ruth always drug him along. Albert got into an altercation with Mrs. Fidgeons brother, Mr. George Hough. Albert was sore after losing some money, and he and George had to be pulled apart when they started arguing. It didn’t come to blows, but it almost did.  

When asked where George was last night after the party, Mr. Fidgeon quickly told the officers that he would have gone straight to his hotel room after the party because it was so late. The party broke up a little after 1AM, so he should have got there a little after that time.  

The Detectives pretty much ruled out the Fidgeon’s as suspects. They didn’t seem to have a grudge against the Snyders, and if they were attacked shortly after getting home, the Fidgeon’s were still seeing lingering guests at their home, so they would not have had the opportunity.   

The Detectives then went down to the Hotel where George Hough was staying, and he also stated that he went straight to his hotel room after the party, and they were able to confirm his late arrival to the Hotel with the hotel staff. So, even though it seemed like he might have a motive, George didn’t commit the murder. This led to a dead-end to this part of the investigation. 

Back at the Snyder’s home, the detectives who were still searching the home found two more pieces of potential evidence. The first was near where Mr. Snyder was murdered. It was a small pin with the initials J.G. on the back. The pin was thought to belong to Mrs. Snyder, and they thought it was curious that she would have something this personal with another person’s initials, that was not her husband’s, on the back of it. They then went into the basement of the home. In a well-hidden spot, they also found an address book. The book contained the names and addresses of 27 men inside. These were all taken to the police station to be gone over.  

The corner also collected the body of Mr. Albert Snyder. The initial investigation at the crime scene left a lot of questions. They didn’t know if he was killed by strangulation or due to the major blows to his head.  

At the station, one of the Detectives went over the address book with an idea in mind. If this were Ruth’s personal address book, and it contained the names of men that she might be seeing on the side, they thought that the initials on the pin might match someone in that book. The initials on the pin were J.G., and there was one name in the book that fit. His name was Judd Gray.

The Detectives put two and two together, and they and the Commissioner went back in to question Ruth Snyder. This time, they were going to go a lot harder on her.  

The first thing they asked was what kind of relationship she had with her husband. Ruth explained that she was a bit of a night owl and her husband was just the opposite. He had a boat, and he enjoyed taking it out during the day. It was why he was always so tan. They asked about the fighting, and at first, she tried to deny it, but they told her that her own daughter told them about the fighting. So, she owned up to it. They were always at odds, it seemed. So it caused a lot of fights in their household. 

They then asked about the missing items from the robbery. They asked her if she knew if they were missing or not. She said they were, so they told her where they found them, under her mattress. Ruth tried to play this off. She told the detectives that she was so forgetful and it was a mistake. She did put them under there.  

The last thing they asked was… Who is Judd Gray? Ruth almost fainted at this question. She suddenly sat up and looked very worried. The Detectives held back from asking anything and just looked hard at her. You see, when someone is being questioned, silence is almost unbearable. A suspect will continue to talk to break that silence. Ruth did just this and what she said turned this whole investigation around. 

***Add Break***

Ruth looked up at the Detectives and quietly asked, “Did he confess?” One of the Detectives responded, “Yes, he did.” Then Ruth started to sob, and she told the entire story.  

She told them that she had known Gray for almost 2 years. They had become more than just friends, and for most of their relationship, they had seen each other behind her husband’s back. They had talked about killing her husband several times. Poison was the preferred method, but they couldn’t quite pull it off. So, on the night of the murder, Gray had laid in wait for them to arrive home. After Albert had fallen asleep, Ruth let Albert into the house. They had already decided that they would kill Albert and make it look like a robbery. Gray took an heavy weight and then went upstairs. He struck Albert Snyder on top of his head twice. He then used the picture wire to finish the job.  

According to Ruth, besides letting him into the home, she had no more to do with her husbands’ death. It was all Gray’s doing. 

They then asked about the pin that they had found on the floor. Ruth was not happy to see it. She told them about her husband’s first love. Jessie Guichard. She had given Albert that pin shorty before she died. He held on to it ever since. No woman was ever as good as Jessie. She was his first love. Although their assumption helped lead them to the truth, it was funny that it was only by chance. 

Judd Gray was staying at a hotel in Syracuse, New York. Police arrived and found him in his room. They arrested him on the spot and charged him with murder. Judd flat out denied the allegations against him. When they searched his room, they found a metal bar and ripped clothing, but nothing that actually linked him to the murder.  

They hauled Judd in for questioning, and they told him that Ruth had already confessed to the crime. They already knew that he had done the deed. But Gray insisted that there was no way he had anything to do with it, and he signed an affidavit to that effect. We have a copy of that affidavit. 

“I am 34 years old. I will be 35 years of age on July 8th 1927. I am married. I live with my wife, Mrs. Isabella Gray. I have one daughter, Jane 10 years old. We live in East Orange, N.J. I was born in Cortland, N.Y.”

“My Father is dead. My Mother resides at West Orange N.J. About March 7th I left my home on my business trip through New York State.” 

“I have known Albert Snyders wife, whos name is Ruth Brown Snyder, for the past two years. I was introduced to her in either May or June of 1925 by Harry Polsom. He admitted that he picked her up through a flirtation in the restaurant. From that time on I became friendly with her.”

“I have talked with the Mother and the daughter, but I have never met or talked to Albert Snyder. I swear that I have not seen or talked with Ruth Snyder in person since about the fourth week in February in 1927, or the first week in March of the same year. The last time that I talked with Mrs. Ruth Snyder was on Thursday night, March 17, from the Hotel Seneca at Rochester.”

“”I stopped there Wednesday night, March 16, and Thursday night, March 17. I checked out of the Hotel on Friday, March 18, between 5 and 6pm., and Arrived at Syracuse at 8:15.” 

“I went directly to the Hotel Onondaga. I stayed there from Friday night until about 2AM on March 21, when I was brought into the police headquarters for investigation. The officer found the gray rolled, a pair of rubber gloves, an Iron pitch bar, and a pair of brown oxford shoes, which were in my hotel room. I had taken the same out of my trunk, which I had sent to the Syracuse Trunk Company, Saturday morning, March 19th, to have repaired.”

“Since Knowing Mrs. Snyder, I have visited her on a number of different occasions. The only time that she ever accompanied me was on an automobile trip. We were gone about a week through New York State. She left the daughter with her Mother. I swear that I know nothing about who committed the murder and swear that I had no part in the murder in any shape or form.”    

The Police held both of them overnight. The papers went crazy over the story and reported on everything that came out as it happened. The continued press brought more and more evidence out into the public eye. A man who worked at a nearby hotel told officers that he had letters for Mr. Gray from Ruth. She would mail them to the Hotel so that Mrs. gray would never see them. When Detectives retrieved the mail and read it, it gave them more ammunition. The letters were from Mrs. Snyder. She was telling Gray that she was so excited about something they believed that it was her husband’s murder that they would be committing soon. Ruth signed each letter with “Love, Your Mommy.” This was leaked to the press, and they had a field day with it. Some papers would now only call Ruth “Gray’s Mommie” from this point on, poking fun at the situation.  

Both Ruth and Gray were charged with the murder of Albert Snyder. But on March 22nd, 1927, they both plead not guilty, sighting the other as the actual murderer. Ruth’s attorney believed that she would be acquitted when they heard the entire story. She could not be found guilty of a murder she didn’t commit. Gray’s attorney stated that his client didn’t commit the murder and that, even though he was there, it was Ruth who did the killing.  

Both Ruth and Gray were tried together. They each accused the other of actually killing Mr. Albert Snyder. The Procession argued that they both planned it. They used the letters as evidence, the confessions, and the autopsy all as evidence. According to Gray, they both hit Albert over the head with the heavy weight. When Gray did it, Albert tried to get up. That was when Ruth took the weight and also hit Albert over the head. They then strangled him with the picture wire. According to the corner, when they tried to strangle Albert, he was already dead. The blows to the head are what killed him.  

At the trial, Ruth tried to convince the jury that she had no hand in her husband’s murder. That Gray did it on his own. She said that Gray forced her to do things like upping Alberts life insurance from 15 thousand to 25 thousand. When Gray attacked her husband, she tried to stop him, but Gray shoved her to the ground, and by the time she was able to get up, he was finished, and Albert was dead.  

Gray testified that they both planned the murder and that she helped, so much so, it was her actions that killed Albert. She had used him because she knew that he was in love with her. She tricked him into killing her husband and that the act was entirely her fault. He even reenacted the murder for the jury so that they would know what actually happened.  

When the case went to the jury, they deliberated for only 98 minutes. When they came back, they announced their verdict, they found that Judd Gray and Ruth Snyder were guilty of murder in the first degree. They fixed death as their sentence.  

On January 12th, 1928, both Judd and Ruth would be executed back to back. They had Judd go first. When they came for him, he had just read a letter from his wife, forgiving him for what he had done. This brought him much peace. He walked into the chamber and spent his last words, warning others of doing wrong. He then sat down and was put to death. Ruth would be next. She was led in by guards and allowed to speak. It was noted that she was acting erratically and had seemed to of aged quite a bit since the trial. She stated that she was too young to die and asked God to forgive them because they knew not what they were doing to her. She then prayed, and they began the procedure, and she was dead after three whole minutes on the chair.  

A reporter for the Daily News had snuck a small camera into the death chamber. He took the first-ever picture of electrocution. The picture of Ruth Snyder’s last moments is forever captured on film. It soon became the most remarkable execution photos in Criminal Justice History.  

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post many cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Visitor,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Could you make sure you go there and check it out?

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may trigger some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

We are in the month of February, the month of love! We decided to start an annual event called “Be Mine.” This will feature true crime stories of love and loss. Many of these stories do not feature a happily ever after, but rather full of misery forevermore.

I hope you all are enjoying this story so far. I have really enjoyed writing it. This is one of those stories that’s occupied my mind ever since I started researching it. But I’m not going to take too much time here with introductions. Let’s get to the story. In part one, we have narrowed down a list of two suspects. One of them is Professor Snook, who the Detectives have zeroed in on. The other was Marion T Meyers, the State researcher who put himself into the investigation. Marion, was let go after it was found that he was not in the area at the time of the murder. Professor Snook was unmoving during all of the questionings, but it wasn’t until they reviled that they had a new witness step forward that everything changed.

The news of the Professor’s involvement in what might be murder was national news. There wasn’t a paper in the state of Ohio that didn’t have this on front-page news for several weeks. Along with that press came multiple photos of the victim and the Professor. Now, people had come forward saying that they often saw the two together, but one man came forward that helped break open this case. A bellman for the local YMCA decided that he needed to tell the police what he knew of Mrs. Hix and Professor Snook.

He told the Detectives that Mrs. Hix rented an apartment from the YMCA and often came home with Professor Snook at her side. He would often go and stay the night with her, so much so that he thought that they were man and wife.

This news was precisely what Detectives were looking for. A current link to the relationship of the Professor and his victim. They went down to the local YMCA, and they took the keys that Mrs. Hix had on her when she died. They wanted to see the key fit the lock. But when they arrived and placed the key in the lock, it didn’t work.

So they decided to check up on this story with the Manager of the YMCA and see if any part of this story was genuine. The Manager told the Detectives that Mrs. Hix did indeed live at the YMCA and that it was Professor Snook who paid for the apartment every month. The morning the body was found before the news hit that Mrs. Hix was dead, the Professor had come into the YMCA and gave her the keys to the apartment. He told her that he was no longer going to rent it, and that was that. He gave two sets of keys to the Manager, and he had left.

When Prosecutor John J. Chester revealed that he knew about the apartment and the nature of the relationship between the two, the Professor seemed to break. He lowered his head and seemed ashamed of what he had done to himself and his family. The Prosecutor questioned him if he had a relationship with Mrs. Hix, and he didn’t say he did but seemed to agree that he did with a nod of his head. The Prosecutor then asked him about the keys. The Manager of the YMCA told them that he was given two keys to the room and that he returned two keys. They asked how he had both sets of keys if the other was supposed to be with Mrs. Hix. Professor Snook finally spoke, “You know how.” The Prosecutor asked to clarify, “You took it from her body?” And the Professor simply said, “Yes.”

The admission of guilt caused the Prosecutor to immediately end the interview at that time. They got a stenographer in the office right away. They knew that the Professor was ready to tell them a confession, and they wanted it all recorded.

In 1929, this was the best way to record interviews and confessions. They would often use a stenotype machine that would look like a typewriter. But this had fewer keys. They write in shorthand to keep up with the conversation. You still see them in courtrooms today and have been in use since the early 1800s.

Once everyone was in place, they recorded what the Professor had to say. The following is the word for word what was said.

Q: What is your name?
A: James Howard Snook.
Q: Your Age?
A: 49
Q: Where do you live?
A: 349 W 10th st.
Q: Now tell the stenographer in your own language what happened on the night of June 13th.

“I met Theora Hix about three years ago. The friendship continued in a very intimate way ever since, as she was a very good companion. I have been living with my wife during this three-year period and regarded my wife very highly and respect her very much as a wife, but she lacked some of the companionship afforded by Mrs. Hix. During the three years that I knew Mrs. Hix, I did assist her in many ways toward education, but I found out it wasn’t appreciated as much as I thought it should be.”

“Our association was not a love affair in any sense of the word. But in time, Mrs. Hix developed a more determined attitude in regard to dictating my movements, and the final culmination of this occurred on the 13th of June of this year when I met Mrs. Hix at the corner of 12th and High street in the city of Columbus when we both got into my Ford coupe and proceeded to drive to Lave Ave, then west out of the Fisher road and to the Columbus rifle range of the New York Central Railroad Company, during when she remonstrated with me against leaving the city with my family for the weekend as I had planned to do. She threatened that if I did go that she would take the life of my wife and baby.”

“During this quarrel, she grabbed for the purse in which she sometimes carried a 41 caliber derringer when I had given her. In the struggle, she was hit on the head with a hammer with the intent to stun her. She continued desperately, and an increased number of blows of increasing force was necessary to stop her. Realizing then that her skull was fractured and to relieve her suffering, I severed her jugular vein with my pocket knife.”

“I then proceeded to pick up the things that had been scattered during the struggle and left. The instrument when I used to quiet her was a hammer lying in the back of the seat. After leaving the rifle range, I proceeded home, tossing the purse from the quarry bridge into the Scioto river on my way. After the struggle was over, I discovered the gun was not in the purse.”

The Professor went on to set up his Defense. He told the officers that he was afraid that Mrs. Hix would have followed up on her threats when she said she should kill his family. He said.

“When she started to get out of the car, I grabbed a hammer from the ledge of the back seat and hit her with the flat side of it. She got out, and I followed, hitting her again and again.”

“”Damn you, I’ll kill you!” were her last words. I kept hitting her. I struck her once with the round end of the hammer. That was a hard one. She was unconscious then and suffering. She had my sympathy. I didn’t want to hit her anymore. I hated to do that. She was lying on her back and moaning slightly when I took out my pocket knife and cut her jugular vein.”

“Her Handbag and keys came out of the car in the struggle. The wound she had on the abdomen and her back was machine cuts. She got them when she fell against the car.”

He then described returning home in a haze. He sat in the dark, thinking of his actions when his wife came down to check on him. She didn’t see the blood all over him because it was so dark. He changed and went to bed but didn’t sleep. The next day he pretended it didn’t happen and didn’t know that the body was found until it had hit the news.

A grand jury was assembled, listening to the evidence at hand. On June 22nd, they decided to indict Professor Snook on first-degree murder charges. They believe that there was enough for first-degree murder because of the confession that he slit her jugular vein when she was suffering. The hammer blows were in response to the danger that the Professor thought himself to be in. But it was the act of killing her when she was subdued that made him a possible murderer.

On June 24th 1929, Professor Snook and his attorneys attended the first hearing before the trial. They would first need to know how Professor Snook intended to plea. The Professor admitted his guilt and said that he would plead guilty but could change his mind.

This was not unexpected by the state. They knew from his confession that he was trying to make it look as if he had to kill her to protect his family. He might also explore another avenue, the temporary insanity plea. This is the “I snapped and lost my mind when it happened. I had no control over my actions” plea. It was slightly suggested that when the Professor spoke about the hammer blows, he felt as if he had to protect everyone. So, since they expected it, the state had already set up an interview the next day for Professor Snook with three doctors. They would each examine his mental and physical health.

They spent most of the day with the Professor. They took a blood sample of his to examine and had him complete a series of tests. By the end of the day, they could soundly say at that time, the Professor was sane. They just had to wait for the blood test to be examined, which could take weeks.

In response to this, the Defence hired their own medical team to examine the Professor as well. They also asked for a change of venue, and they wanted the trial date pushed back. It was set for July 22nd, just a little over a month after the murder. This was denied by the court. The Judge stated that he didn’t believe that anything could be gained by delaying the case. There were no more facts or findings, so there was no reason to wait.

But, the Defence had another trick up their sleeve. If they changed their plea to Not Guilty for the reason of insanity, the court would have no choice but to delay due to having to further judge the sanity of Professor Snook at the time of the murder.

The Judge, who wanted no delays, called both sides into his chambers to discuss what they would do. The Judge ordered that the Professor be examined again before the trial starts, and that would cause little to no delay if they worked over the weekend. Both sides agreed. So the weekend before the trial was to have started, three more doctors came in to examine Professor Snook. By Monday morning, their findings were that he was sane.

So, Professor Snook changed his plea to Not Guilty / He acted in self-defense. They also stated that he had emotional insanity. He was overcome with his emotions which led to Mrs. Hix’s death.

The trial began on August 3rd, 1929, after the jury selection had ended. They had one delay when a juror got sick, but they were able to replace her quickly.

The state first called the state doctor who performed the autopsy on Mrs. Hix. He stated that he believed this was premeditated murder, something that the Defence jumped on right away. They asked for him to prove that statement from his findings. The doctor pointed out that the Professor cut her throat to end her suffering of damage caused her.

They called the owner of the cleaners, where the Professor took his suit that had bloodstains on it. The Professor brought it first thing in the morning the day after the murder.

They called several witnesses, including one that came forward to have seen Mrs. Hix with someone in the parking lot of the rifle range. They appeared to have been fighting at the time. He said he didn’t stop because he had his daughters with him. He didn’t think about it again until the news of Mrs. Hix’s death was published, and he waited to report what he had seen because he didn’t want to be involved. This was important because, according to the confession, Mrs. Hix didn’t get out o the car for long without being hit over and over with the hammer. This showed that there was more to the story than what the Professor was willing to admit.

Then the state revealed that they did some really odd tests. You see, they started the theory that the Professor drugged Mrs. Hix and then killed her. This theory was formed when the doctor who did the autopsy found beef in her stomach, something she didn’t have time to digest before she died. They believed it was laced with drugs. So, the doctor gave some of the undigested beef to a dog. The dog acted weird and wobbly after eating the meat. As if he was drugged with some kind of sedative.

I found this to be a completely crazy way to test a theory. I would be wobbly and acting sick if I, too, were given undigested meat from the stomach of a dead person. Drugged or not. But the test was done, and it was considered evidence in the doctor’s mind that the meat was drugged.

Then the newspaper writer, who also gained a confession from the Professor, also testified to what he was told. The Defense challenged this because it was taken while the Professor was under duress. But the Judge decided to allow it to give the complete picture of the confession.

The Defense called character witnesses to the stand. They had Mrs. Snook and the Professors’ mother testify to what kind of person he really is. Then they called Professor James Snook to the stand. He testified to his entire life story. How he met Mrs. Hix and how they fell for each other. They had an understanding that they would see each other for physical pleasure and not much more. He told a story of how Mrs. Hix began experimenting with drugs and became addicted to them. He then told of the night she died and recounted what had happened. How she threatened the life of his family and that he believed that she had her gun on her. He taught her how to shoot, and she was good at it. He was an Olympic gold medalist for shooting and knew what he was talking about. He stated that he was only acting in self-defense when he killed her.

The case was handed over to the jury. They had come back within the record-breaking time. Within 30 minutes, they came to their decision. They found Dr. James Snook, Guilty of Murder in the first degree. They fixed death as his sentence.

The jury obviously didn’t believe the story that the Professor had put together. It was hard to believe that a firearm expert like Dr. Snook would kill someone in self-defense, thinking they had a gun when they didn’t. He bled her out to kill her.

In the months leading up to his execution, Attorneys for the Professor tried hard to save his life. But each appeal was struck down. He was scheduled to die on February 28th, 1930. When the Governor declined to step in and stop the execution, Dr. Snook did something extraordinary. He confessed to everything.

The Prison Wardon came in to see Dr. Snook before he was to be put to death. It was there where he heard the full confession to what had happened. He told the Warden that Mrs. Hix was going to expose him. She would tell the world about their affair and that he would be ruined. It would expose him, end his marriage, and end his teaching career. So, he simply planned to kill her. This was his only way to ensure that he would not be exposed, and he honestly believed that no one would be able to tie him to the murder. He was shocked when they got to him so fast.

On March 1st, 1930, Dr. Snook stepped into the death chamber. Without any assistance, he took a seat in the electric chair. The preacher prayed for him, and then soon after, he was put to death.

James Snook was buried in his family’s plot, but they did not use his last name on the tombstone. They used his middle name as his last so that no one would damage the stone.

It’s amazing that these kinds of things have been going on for so long. I am always hearing about people in power taking advantage of others. We see it in politics, media, and in personal businesses. Over a year ago, I learned that a creator like myself did some horrible things with a young woman when they attended the show he worked on. It was a real eye-opener for me. You just never know if someone is honest until it’s just too late.

I hope you all enjoyed this series. This was incredible to research. Make sure you rate the podcast and share it with a friend. We want to grow and provide more content. The only way that will happen is with your help. You can follow me and my exploits by following my social media. The links are in the description. I hope you all have a great week, and I will see you all next time. See ya.

WHEN?

June 13th, 1929

WHAT?

Killed with a hammer and throat slashed.

WHERE?

Mrs. Hix was killed on the OSU campus. Two students discovered her body when they went to the Rifle Range. The Range’s name was the New York Central Railroad Rifle Range.

WHO?

Theora K Hix, 25, Murder Victim. 

Dr. James H Snook, Suspect

Marion T Meyers, Suspect

Chief of Detectives W. G. Shellenbarger, lead Detective on the case.

Prosecutor John J. Chester, Lead Prosecutor

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post many cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Visitor,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Could you make sure you go there and check it out?    

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may trigger some listeners. Listener discretion is advised. 

Hello everyone, and welcome to the show. I spent the last month getting a lot ready for this year. So far, we have a pretty great lineup for you all. So far, I have about 30 cases that I am researching and doing writeups on. Not all of them will become podcasts. Some become deadends or are just too short of making it into a podcast. Some of them will be multipart episodes. This has been an enormous undertaking and has been a lot of fun to dig through. The end goal here is to provide you with the best and most accurate content that I can provide. 2021 was a massive year for us, and I want to make 2022 even more significant. 

We are in the month of February, the month of love! We decided to start an annual event called “Be Mine.” This will feature true crime stories of love and loss. Many of these stories do not feature a happily ever after, but rather full of misery forevermore.   

This story is one of shock and betrayal, Love and Fear. This story is unique in many ways, but deep down, it’s like many others that we have covered over the years. This is the month of love, and today I am bringing you a story of forbidden love. One forgotten through time, and yet it seems so familiar.  

This story first takes place on June 13th, 1929, near Ohio State University. Two college students were just arriving at the New York Central Railroad Rifle Range. This Range was a popular spot for shooters in the area. It featured some of the best shooters in the country.  

These two young men were the first on the Range for the day. The shooting field was overgrown, the grass was knee-high or taller. The boys walked out to place their targets, and one of them noticed something in the distance. It almost looked like someone was sleeping in the tall grass. The boy pointed it out to his friend, and they went to investigate. What they found, they would never forget. A woman was lying in the field. Her head was beaten and bloody. As they got closer, they knew she was dead. They quickly left the Range and alerted the police to what had happened. 

One of the first Detectives on the scene was the Chief of Detectives, W. G. Shellenbarger. The Detective advised everyone to stay back from the body. He wanted to observe the area before they went in. He could see the tracks the two boys made from the tall grass, placing their targets and then their tracks heading to the body. You see, when you move through the tall grass like that, it parts the grass enough for you to know where you had been. But, besides their tracks, there were no others in the area. None that lead to or from the body. So, this made the Detective believe that it had been there for a while. The grass had repositioned itself, and the tracks were now gone. 

They then moved in. As the Detective checked the body, the other officers were combing through the tall grass, looking for anything that could be evidence.  

Detective Shellenbarger and the Corner counted multiple blows to the head. They were rounded, so they thought it might be from a hammer. The Corner noted the roundness of each impact, and he believed it to be a ball-peen hammer, the type that has a rounded head. Her throat and body had several deep slashes as well.  

The Detective searched the woman’s personal belongings. He found a set of keys in her pocket but nothing else to help identify the woman.  

The search was completed just hours later. Nothing was found on the rifle range. No hammer or knife was left at the scene. The Corner took the mystery woman back to his office, where he would start his investigation on the manner of death. But this woman would not be a mystery woman for long.  

Two sisters who attended Ohio State University were very worried about their roommate, who had not returned to the dorm from a date. So they decided to go to the police station and tell the authorities about the situation. They described the missing woman to a detective, who thought it matched with the woman found on the rifle range.  

The two sisters were Allice and Beatrice Bustin. The Detective led them to the morgue to see if they could identify the woman found that morning. When they were shown the body, they positively identified her as Theora K. h ix, their missing friend.  

The police questioned the two girls about what they knew of Mrs. Hix’s movements yesterday. They both stated that she had gone to the hospital to see if she could get a part-time job there to earn some extra money. She was a medical student and was interested in the work. She had also told them that she had a date that night. They were surprised because Mrs. Kix never dated anyone. She was very focused on school. The sisters didn’t know much about her private life. They said that she was seen with an older man in a small car several times around campus, but they didn’t know what the relationship was there. They thought he was faculty. She had also been seen with another man closer to her age. He might be a student or a young staffer.  

Besides that, they didn’t know much about Mrs. Hix. She had mostly kept to herself and offered little about her life to anyone. The only thing they remember her saying was that her family was from Florida, where her parents were.  

The Detective then worked on notifying the next of kin. In this case, it was Mrs. Hix’s parents. They contacted the school, who gave them the contact information. Then they made contact with her parents. They were absolutely devastated to learn of the news of their daughter’s death. They had not seen her for quite some time since she started school, and now they would never see her alive again. They started the long drive to Ohio from Florida when notified of the news.  

Detective Shellenbarger then decided to follow up on Mrs. Hix’s movements through the day. He had already spoken to her roommates, but they said she had left to find work at the hospital. So that was the next place that he went. It was found out that the hospital did indeed see Mrs. Hix that previous day and they hired her on the spot. They trained her on operating the phone switch, and then she had to go. She told them she had a date to go on but provided no names.  

It was odd that the name of the person she had a date with was such a mystery. But, the thing about small towns, news travels fast, is doubly true on school campuses. The news of Mrs. Hix’s murder spread like wildfire across campus, and that’s when the police received their first big tip.  

The police received several tips about Mrs. Hix, but several that came in all at once was that she was often in the company of a teacher at the school, Professor James Snook. They had seen her in his car just a day or two ago.  

This was surprising because James Snook was not just a teacher at the school. He was a local celebrity. He once held the world’s record for pistol shooting and was also a gold medallist at the 1920 Summer Olympic Games for 50-meter team pistol shooting. He taught veterinary medicine at Ohio State University and had done so for some time, making a name for himself as a senior member of the faculty.  

The Detective called the school to see where Professor Snook was, and his assistant told him they believed that he went to the shooting range, where he spent much of his time. They immediately went to check, and indeed, they found the Professor there shooting a rifle, and they brought him in for questioning.  

The Detectives wanted to know what the Professor knew about Mrs. Hix, and they needed to rule him out as a suspect. So they needed to know his movements for the previous night. The Professor told them that he and Mrs. Hix were professional friends, nothing else. She was in his car because he was putting together a book, and he needed her help with typing. They had discussed payment for the service.  

One thing that the Detective noticed right away was that Professor Snook’s hand was bandaged. They asked about the injury, and the Professor told them that he had hurt his hand while working on his car.  

The Professor told the police that on the night of the murder, he had stayed late in the office. He didn’t leave until 7 or 8 PM. He then drove to the country club to get some shooting glasses, and then he purchased a newspaper on the way home. He met his wife at home around 9:30PM. Professor Snook believed that the school’s night watchman could confirm with the police that he was indeed in the office and that others from his stops would do the same to verify his movements.  

Officers would start verifying the Professor’s statements, but Detective Shellenbarger received an intriguing phone call from the Corner’s office before they could. A man had just left his office, he asked to view the body of Theora Hix. The man was upset about her death and stated that he knew her well. His name was Marion Myers, and he fit the description of the person who was a little closer to her age that Mrs. Hix had been seen with recently.  

So the Detectives sent officers to find Mr. Myers. Mr. Myers was a state employee. He worked for the State Department of Agriculture and conducted research at Ohio State University. They would start there to find out where he was staying while researching.  

Detective Shellenbarger went to the Professors office and spoke with his staff. They didn’t work as late as the Professor did, so they couldn’t tell them one way or another if the Professor had indeed stayed late in the office. The Detective then checked with the staff about what they did know about the Professor’s movements today. And that’s when they gave up some interesting information. You see that morning when the Professor first came in for the day. He had his staff take care of and clean his car. It wasn’t unusual for him to have them do so, but it was the first thing he had them do for the day.  

Now, the Professors car had been left at the shooting range where they had picked him up. So Detective Shellenbarger then returned to the station to pick up the keys to the car, and then he began getting a warrant to search the Professors vehicle and Mr. Meyers vehicle.  

In the meantime, Officers located Marion Myers, the state worker. He was at a fraternity house on campus. He was arrested on suspicion and was brought to the station for questioning. The entire time he pleaded with the officers that he had nothing to do with the murder, but they told him to cooperate, and if he had nothing to do with it, he had nothing to worry about.  

When Mr. Myers arrived at the station, Detective Shellenbarger immediately interviewed him. When asked about his relationship with Mrs. Hix, he said he had been a close friend of hers two years ago, but their friendship had cooled. He said he was in Columbus Thursday night and had returned to Bono when a fraternity brother called him early today to tell him of Mrs. Hix’s death. Thinking it might be a joke, he phoned the police to see if it were true. He then said that he then came to Columbus. 

Once they received the warrant to search both suspects’ cars, they did so right away, starting with Dr. Snook’s car. When they arrived at the shooting range, they were a little disappointed. The vehicle had indeed been cleaned very well. It was evident that the exterior and interior of the car had been detailed. But they still searched. Blood has this way of seeping into areas that no one thinks to clean. They looked under flooring and in creases but found nothing. Only when they opened the passenger door, one of the Detectives noticed what looked to be a drop of blood on the door jam. He carefully collected the sample. The sample would be taken to the police chemist to see what it was. You see, back in 1929, we didn’t have DNA evidence, but we could identify blood and type it. If it matched the same type of the victim, it would be one more piece of evidence of who had committed the crime. It would take several days for the chemist to have the results, but it was their first lead.  

They also impounded Mr. Meyers’s car and conducted a search on it as well. Unlike the Professor’s car, Mr. Meyers didn’t appear to have been recently cleaned. It had a more used look but didn’t contain anything that seemed to be blood.  

They continued searching the car. They also found a ball-peen hammer in the trunk, like the one believed used in the murder. They also found stained gloves. They, too, were taken by the chemist to see if they had blood on them. With this possible evidence, Detective Shellenbarger could obtain a warrant to search the Professors house.  

The Detectives, in this case, we’re moving as fast as they could. They had heald both men on suspicion, but if they didn’t charge them with a crime. They had to let them go after 48 hours.  

Focusing on Professor Snook at the moment, the Detectives worked on getting the warrant on searching his house. The scope of the search would be for articles of clothing or items that appear to have blood on them. Once obtained, they quickly moved in to search the home. Mrs. Snook was home, and she let the Detectives in with little protest. She hoped that the lack of evidence would prove her husband’s innocence. She was the main alibi for her husband. She told officers that he had been with her after 9:30PM and that he never left the house once he got home.  

Once inside the home, they found a couple of items. One was a piece of dry-cleaning that was just picked up from the cleaners. It was a jacket of the Professors. It had stains on the sleeve that could have been blood. The slip showed it was dropped off the day after the murder. The other was not discovered until they looked into the home’s furnace. Inside was a shirt with stains on it and a women’s vanity case. Mrs. Snook had no idea why those items would have been in the furnace. 

Now, Detectives were starting to lean toward Professor Snook as their primary suspect. They still needed to rule Marion Meyers out, but things were looking up for him. Mr. Meyers had told them all along that he didn’t learn of Mrs. Hix’s death until a friend had called him. The police interviewed this friend, and he told them the same story. He actually called long distance to speak to Mr. Meyers and that he was shocked to learn of her death. With no evidence against him, Detectives decided to take one more shot at cracking him before letting him go.

Detectives took Mr. Meyers to the morgue, where Mrs. Hix’s body was. They made him look at her and the damage that had been done to her. It was said that he showed little emotion during this. When he didn’t break and tell them more information, the Detectives let him go.  

On his way out of the police station, Mr. Meyers said little as he got into his car. The only statement he made was that he was now scared of Professor Snook.  

Now with just one suspect. The Detectives, who had been taking it somewhat easy on Professor Snook, now we’re changing gears and were coming at him much harder. They refused to let him rest or sleep. For hours they would slowly reveal the evidence they found against him. First, they told him what they believed, that he killed Mrs. Hix and then transported her body to the shooting range. They thought that the blood-like stain on his car was from the Professor closing the door on her hand when she tried to escape. She had an injury on her hand that looked like it had been closed in a door. 

The Detectives then showed him the charred articles of clothing that didn’t thoroughly burn in his furnace and the cleaned jacket that looked to have bloodstains on it. But as they brought each piece of evidence out, it didn’t seem to phase the Professor in any way. He sat there, unmoving and uninterested in what they had to say. But the next thing the Detectives revealed changed all of that. Because they had a new witness come forward. 

Who was this witness? Find out next time on Part two of this story debuting next week.  

I hope you all enjoyed this series so far. It’s only a two-part series and is a great story. This was incredible to research. Make sure you rate the podcast and share it with a friend. We want to grow and provide more content. The only way that will happen is with your help. You can follow me and my exploits by following my social media. The links are in the description. I hope you all have a great week, and I will see you all next time. See ya.  

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “Silent Night, Deadly Night,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised. This story discusses suicide. If you or anyone you know is suicidal, please call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. It is a United States-based suicide prevention network of over 160 crisis centers that provides 24/7 service via a toll-free hotline with the number 1-800-273-8255. It is available to anyone in a suicidal crisis or emotional distress.

Hello everyone, we are still in “The 12 days of Murder.” From now and until the new year, I will be debuting several new episodes that are Christmas-themed. Many of these cases are ones you probably never heard of before, so make sure you subscribe to the show. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Check out TrueCrime.blog and our Facebook Paige, Okie Investigations for bonus stories as well.

I hope everyone is having a great Holiday Season. Its been very busy for me, but I have been enjoying it. I do have a programming update for next month. Seeing that it is the start of the new year, I want to spend the month getting caught up on research and writing. So, there will be a couple of episodes and bonus content that will come out in January 2022. Doing this helps set us up for the year in staying ahead on content. Make sure you subscribe to the show so when new episodes are out, you are the first to know. Also, these podcasts live and die on word of mouth. If you can be so kind, please let others know about the show. It will help us grow and be able to provide better and better content down the road.

Today we have an extraordinary episode, it’s going to be a little short, so this may end up being a bonus episode. We will see. But if you remember our last two episodes, we had covered the sad story of Elizabeth Ford Griffith. She died on Christmas eve in unusual circumstances. She died in Dr. Schott’s office, her employer, in 1919 while he was supposedly out delivering presents. Dr. Schott was believed to be the murderer, but the prosecutor failed to convince a grand jury of his guilt, and he was allowed to be set free with no charges against him.

Personally, I believe that Dr. Schott killed poor Elizabeth. He was jealous of her pending marriage, and perhaps the holidays set him over the edge. He found a young 13-year-old girl who would be his alibi and used her to save his life.

Now, 8 years after the grand jury decision, on April 17th, 1928, police are again summoned to Dr. Schott’s new sanatorium. Because another murder has taken place…

Around 1:45pm in the afternoon in Louisville, Kentucky, Lieutenant John Guttermuth received a phone call about a reported shooting at the local sanatorium. He was one of the first officers to have arrived on the scene. As he walked inside, he was met by a man named Dan Newman. Dan was a nurse at the sanatorium. He told Lt. Guttermuth that he shot Dr. Schott in self-defense and was now dead. Continued and said that the Dr. was verbally assaulting him and the staff and that he reached into his pocket as if he were pulling out a gun. That’s when Dan pulled his own gun and shot the Dr. before he could shoot him.

The officers took Dan into custody and brought him back to the station. From his admission, he could be let go if this was indeed in self-defense, like he said. But they needed to hold him just to make sure. He could also be facing murder charges if it came to it.

Lt. Guttermuth walked into the kitchen where Dr. Schott’s body was. The Dr. was on the floor. He was shot three times. Once in the heart, once in the shoulder, and the other in the liver. It was noted that the Dr. smelled like Alcohol. It was also noted that the Doctor did not have a gun on him. When Nurse Dan pulled his gun and shot the Doctor, he shot an unarmed man. Further investigation showed that Dan had fired the gun 5 times. Two bullets missed and struck the room behind him.

Detectives then interviewed the only witness of the shooting. Mrs. Frances Beckley. Mrs. Beckly stated that the Doctor had awoken a patient of the sanatorium. He then berated her, and then he shouted at Mrs. Beckly to put her to bed. Then, he noticed that a key was not in the door to the kitchen where it was supposed to be left. He then turned back and started shouting and cussing at Mrs. Beckly, the cook, whose job was to operate the kitchen.

That’s when Dan stepped in and told the Doctor that he could not treat his employees that way. The two got into a heated argument which then ended with Dr. Schott being killed.

Dr. Schott had been spiraling out of control for some time now. Ever since he was accused of Elizabeth’s murder, things never got back to normal. Instead of private practice, Dr. Schott decided to open up a sanatorium. The first one he opened burned down. He made the news when he had helped rescue several nurses from the burning building. He also made the news when he wrecked his car in 1925. A woman was with him, and she sewed him for several thousand dollars because of his reckless driving. She refused to say why she was in the car with the Doctor, just that he was driving unsafe when they wrecked.

In the months that led up to Dr. Schott’s death. He had been drinking a lot. One nurse stated that she had been working there for several months and had not seen him sober once. There were rumors of Dr. Schott having affairs with other nurses and clients alike. He treated women as if they were something to possess, a toy, nothing else.

Dr. Schott’s body was laid to rest on April 19th, 1928. He was buried in a lot adjoining the one that contained Elizabeth Griffith. He was not buried next to her like he once stated.

Meanwhile, Dan Newman was not as lucky with a grand jury as Dr. Schott. Dan was charged with murder. The Detectives were able to show that not only was the Dr. unarmed, but it also appeared that he was trying to get away from Dan and had presented him with no danger. The idea that self-defense could be used in this case made no sense to the state prosecutors.

The Corners Jury also came to the same conclusion. Although they do not assign full legal guilt, they concluded that it was Dan who killed the Doctor. Now, long-time listeners to the show know what a corner’s jury is, but I will give a brief explanation. A coroner’s jury is like any other jury, except these individuals are Medical Doctors. Depending on the state, they examine the body, they make a conclusion of how they died, and in some states, they investigate the crime and name who they think was responsible.

Dan Newman’s Trial began on June 11th, 1928 , just two months after Dr. Schott’s murder. The state explained the circumstances of the crime to the jury. That the Doctor was unarmed and presented to threat to anyone. The Detectives testified to Dan’s actions they first arrived, how he admitted to killing the Doctor, and he handed over the weapon that he brought to work. Through testimony, they let the jury know that the Doctor was trying to leave the room when he was shot and killed.

But when it came to the Defence, they came up with a very unique strategy. They called witnesses that spoke about the Doctor’s excessive drinking. They talked about the wild parties that he threw and how he treated women regularly. They interviewed the nurses who talked about the affairs he had with multiple women and that he was always drinking at work.

Then they called Dan Newman to the stand. He told of a story of how, several months before the shooting, he was spending time with Dr. Schott while he was heavy drinking. Dr. Schott confided with Dan that he had killed not once but twice and gotten away with two murders. He bragged that he could not be taken down by anyone. Dan didn’t like where the conversation had gone and had changed the subject. But the next day, the Doctor remembered what had been said and that now someone knew of his past crimes. Ever since then, Dr. Schott began to treat Dan horribly. he even threatened him several times. This was why Dan was carrying a gun to work. He was afraid that Dr. Schott would try and kill him, just like his last two victims.

On the day of the shooting, Dr. Schott was in a rare mood. He was treating everyone horrible, and Dan had enough when he saw him screaming at the cook. So, Dan told Dr. Schott that he could not treat his employees that way. The Doctor then started yelling at Dan, and then he reached into his pocket as if he were grabbing something. Dan thought it was a gun, and he pulled his first and shot the Doctor. He told the jury that he didn’t want to, but he felt like his life was in danger.

The case was handed over to the jury. They deliberated for 31 minutes. When they came back, everyone felt as if they knew the verdict. It was never a good sign for the Defence when they quickly came back. The jury found Dan Newman not guilty of murder. It was said that Dan bounced up and down joyfully in his chair when the verdict was read aloud. Afterward, members of the jury came down and shook Dans and his council’s hands. The state prosecutor was furious at the judgment. He asked the judge to throw out the self-defense plea, convict Dan for murder, and sentence him to 20 years in prison. But the judge struck that idea down quickly.

This case was very odd, start to finish. One of those that could have very quickly gone very wrong for Dan. But the jury sided with him and believed in his testimony enough to let him off on self-defense when the other person was unarmed.

Now, don’t get me wrong. I have minimal sympathy for Dr. Schott. I believe that he murdered Elizabeth and got away with it. I also believe Dan when he says that Dr. Schott admitted to killing two people, and it makes me wonder who that second person could be.

But, this is all the time I have for today. I hope you all enjoyed this short series. I am working on more Christmas themed stories for the Podcast or on the website TrueCrime.blog, so make sure you go and check those out. Make sure you subscribe and I will see you all next time, see ya!

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “Silent Night, Deadly Night,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised. This story discusses suicide. If you or anyone you know is suicidal, please call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. It is a United States-based suicide prevention network of over 160 crisis centers that provides 24/7 service via a toll-free hotline with the number 1-800-273-8255. It is available to anyone in a suicidal crisis or emotional distress.

Hello everyone, we are still in “The 12 days of Murder.” From now and until the new year, I will be debuting several new episodes that are Christmas-themed. Many of these cases are ones you probably never heard of before, so make sure you subscribe to the show. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Check out TrueCrime.blog and our Facebook Paige, Okie Investigations for bonus stories as well.

I hope everyone is doing well. This has been a very busy holiday season for me. But I prefer it to be that way. My Son is coming down from College to spend the month with us, and I am very excited about that. It’ll be nice having everyone in the house again.

Last time on the program, you will remember we were telling the tragic story of Elizabeth Ford Griffith. Elizabeth was engaged to Army Captian George Gordan. She was found dead at work. Her boss and former boyfriend, Dr. Christopher G. Schott was the prime suspect in the case. He told police that he was out delivering presents with little Laurine Gardner. When he left Elizabeth, she was alive and well. When they came back, she was dead. The Doctor stated that he believed that Elizabeth had taken her own life.

The Corner believed otherwise. If Elizabeth had shot herself, she would have had to do it in an odd sitting position. She would have powder burns on her clothing, showing that the gun was pressed near her, and none were present. So the weapon had to have been fired away from the body. Making it all too difficult to do when in that odd sitting position.

Besides that, there was little evidence that the Doctor had committed the crime. At this time, the only person who can break the Doctors alibi and show that he was indeed at the office near the time of the murder, is coincidentally, the victim’s sister, Katie May Griffith. She stated that she had called around 2 pm and that Dr. Schott answered the phone at that time.

But something that was just being revealed to the public. There was another witness to the Doctor’s whereabouts at the time of the murder. You see, one of the first things that the police had done was canvas the neighborhood. They interviewed anyone and everyone who lived in the area. Police wanted to know if they had heard the gunshot and if they knew what time it was. The police got much more than they bargained for when they talked to Mrs. Ellis Rudolph. She told police that she lived across from the Doctor’s office. That on Christmas Eve, around 2:30 pm, she heard a gunshot. She stepped outside to see what had happened, but all she saw was Dr. Schott coming out of his office. He approached Mrs. Rudolph and asked if she had heard anything, and she told him about the loud bang sound. The Doctor told her to check to see if anyone else had heard it, but the Doctor was gone when she came back.

A second witness came forward as well. Mr. William J. Ryan stated that he was walking down the street when he saw Dr. Schott come out of his office around 2:30 pm. He said they had a brief conversation and then went about his day. He didn’t realize until he had heard about the death of Elizabeth and the arrest of the Doctor that he might have just seen the Doctor just after the murder.

These statements gave the state’s attorneys enough to arrest the Doctor for murder. But Dr. Schott was not the only one in trouble. Because the state’s attorneys were so sure that the Doctor was not telling the truth about his movements on Christmas Eve, it meant that little Laurine Gardner, who stated that she was with the Doctor the entire day, was also not telling the truth.

Since the Doctors arrest, the police had let Laurine go into a detention center. Their reasoning was that her parents let her do as she pleased and were obviously not watching over her. The judge placed a two hundred dollar bail on her release, and her parents quickly paid it. So Detectives knew that she was back at home. So, on December 28th, 1919, Police and Detectives entered the Gardner home and then arrested Laurine as an accomplice to murder. While she was being arrested, her parents were pleading that she not be taken. When that didn’t work, they screamed at Laurine to not cooperate with Detectives and not to answer a single question.

Other than her statements, the Detectives and Attorneys had reason to suspect Laurine as knowing more than she is letting on. She had shown little to no emotion to the death of someone she had seen throughout that day. This was, in the eyes of the police, very suspicious.

When told of the arrest of Laurine, Dr. Schott was conducting an interview with the Courier-Journal paper. He told the paper several things, but one of them stuck out as something very odd. He said: “Now that they have arrested her, I will tell something I have never yet said. After Laurine and I left the Standard Dairy Lunch, before the body was found on Wednesday, and were getting in the automobile, I said: “Gee, I wonder if she killed herself? When we arrived in front of my office, I said: ‘Laurine, you come in the office with me.’ “I had a fear that the girl killed herself,” he said.

This statement is very odd. To be brought up in such a manner only casts more doubt to Dr. Schott’s innocence in my eyes. He is trying too hard to prove his innocence. If he had told Laurine his suspicions, then there could be someone who would testify that is precisely how he felt at the time. But he didn’t. Also, according to Laurine’s own statement, she was the first one out of the car. She didn’t have to be told to get out and come along. She was already going on in.

On New Year’s Eve, Dr. Schott is let out of jail on an eight thousand dollar bail. He told the papers that several female patients were calling to get appointments. Many of them had nothing wrong with them. They just wanted to be around him. He suggested that he found it hard to get on without a secretary and that he was putting out an ad to hire a new one. Amazingly, he found someone willing to replace Elizabeth. 45-year-old Mrs. Hartung who had been looking for a job. She reported that the phone at the office had constantly been ringing, and then the caller would either hang up or say they had the wrong number.

Oddly enough, the same night that Dr. Schott is let out of jail. Someone went to the address that the paper listed were Mr. William Ryan lived at, who was the witness that said he saw the Doctor at his office around the time of the murder, and this unknown person left a letter at the door that threatened the life of William Ryan. This letter was written in red ink and had a photo of William inside with red ink splattered on it like blood. The letter was handed over to the police.

The Corners Jury announced their verdict on January 3rd, 1920. They were split on if Elizabeth killed herself or not. They could not really say one way or another. They knew that she died of the gunshot, but not by who’s hand. The problem they had was they did a test with Dr. Schott’s gun. They shot a piece of cheesecloth with it at various lengths to see how far you would need to hold it out to not get powder burns. This test showed that all you had to do with this gun was hold it out 3 inches or more, and it would not produce burns. This was damming to the state’s stance on why they believed the Doctor was guilty in the first place.

Now a grand jury is different than a jury trial. In a jury trial, the state has to prove that the accused is guilty without a shadow of a doubt. It’s the state’s job to show that 100%, this person is guilty. But in a grand jury case, all the state needs to do is prove that there is enough evidence to charge someone with something. They don’t have to prove anything. They just need to show that there is enough for us to think that this person did it.

So when the grand jury started seeing this case. They were flooded with witness statements from both sides of the aisle. Several took the stand, including Elizabeth’s sister, her parents, those who received presents from Dr. Schott, the person who served him at lunch, Little Laurine testified for Dr. Schott. They all told of what they witnessed and how it all happened on that day.

While all of this was going on. The state found another charge to place against Dr. Schott. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor. Dr. Schott and Laurine Gardner’s parents were all brought up on this charge. They were basically saying that you personally helped this child break the law and did nothing about it. This wasn’t a severe charge. It didn’t mean that they would spend a lot or any real-time in jail or prison if convicted. But because this was such a publicized case, this ended up being in almost every paper in the state.

It took several days for the jury to decide whether there was enough to charge the Doctor with Elizabeth’s murder. End the end, they exonerated Dr. Schott of any wrongdoing. It was the decision of the grand jury that there was just not enough evidence to bring the Doctor up on charges.

Elizabeth’s mother came out and spoke to the press after the verdict. She talked to the Owensboro Messenger, and this was published on January 14th, 1920. “There’s another and higher court,” said Mrs. John Griffith, mother of the dead girl, when she heard the grand jury’s report, “and as sure as there is a God in heaven the guilty will not go unpunished. Anybody who ever knew prro dear Elizabeth knows she could now have committed suicide. She was a bright, sweer and sunny-natured child. We have received six or seven letters every day since she was killed from poeple all over the country expressing their sympathy.”

Because they were not charged, the charges of Contributing to the delinquency of a minor were dropped. The state tried every which way to hold and stop the Doctor, but it seemed like they failed at every point.

A year after this decision, in an odd turn of events. Dr. Schott had the body of Elizabeth moved to his family plot. He erected a 500 dollar monument to her, which still stands today. I have a link to this at TrueCrime.blog if you want to see it. Dr. Schott was quoted as saying, “I loved Elizabeth and I feel as if she belongs to me.”

Kinda creepy. Elizabeth’s family oddly went along with this. I can’t imagine that the Doctor could move the body without their permission. No motive behind that was ever published. I find this very odd and the type of thing you can base ghost stories on. One of the papers that reported this stated that Dr. Schott vowed to take the open space next to Elizabeth as his own, so he would be close to her.

Now, Dr. Schott was never re-tried for the death of Elizabeth. He went on about his life, continuing to womanize, putting himself and others in danger, and so on. Typically this is the part where I tell you that the story is complete, and we discuss how I feel about it, but would you be surprised to learn that there is a part three to this story? Would you be surprised to hear that another murder happened in Dr. Schott’s office just a few years after Elizabeth’s murder? And would you be surprised to find out that Dr. Schott was the one that was murdered?

Join us next time for episode three and the conclusion of this exciting story, “The Murder of Dr. Schott.”

I would be interested in hearing everyone’s take on this case. Email me at Okieinvestigations@gmail.com and tell me how you feel about it. Personally, I think that not only did Doctor Schott kill Elizabeth, but he convinced a 13-year-old girl to help him.

If you have enjoyed this show, make sure you subscribe, it tells the podcasting networks that you enjoy this, and it will actually recommend the podcast to others like you. I will see you all next time. See ya.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “Silent Night, Deadly Night,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out.    

 Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised. This story discusses suicide. If you or anyone you know is suicidal, please call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. It is a United States-based suicide prevention network of over 160 crisis centers that provides 24/7 service via a toll-free hotline with the number 1-800-273-8255. It is available to anyone in a suicidal crisis or emotional distress.

Hello everyone, “The 12 days of Murder.” From now and until the new year, I will be debuting several new episodes that are Christmas-themed. Many of these cases are ones you probably never heard of before, so make sure you subscribe to the show. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Check out TrueCrime.blog and our Facebook Paige, Okie Investigations for bonus stories as well.  

We have quite the lineup of stories that we are working on. This is a lot of fun to research, and I thank you all for listening. This story is not very well known to those outside of Kentucky.  

So I am taking you all back to December 24th, Christmas eve, in the year 1919. We are in Louisville, Kentucky.  

Deputy Corner Singer was having a quiet Christmas eve at home when his phone rang. He answered, and it was a local doctor, Dr. Christopher C. Schott. Dr. Schott said he needed Singer to come right away. He had just returned to his office in the late afternoon, and he found his Secretary dead on the floor. Dr. Schott believed it was suicide.  

It wasn’t unusual for a doctor to call the Corner, but this was a little odd. Something had happened to this Secretary, suicide or not, and the police needed to be able to investigate this as well. So, Deputy Corner Singer made a phone call to the local station and alerted them to the situation on his way out. That way, they could have a Detective there as well.  

It didn’t take long for the Corner to arrive at Dr. Schott’s Office. He was there within minutes. He walked in, and Dr. Schott showed him the body. He said that he only touched he to see if she was living or not. On the floor was a beautiful girl, lost to this world too soon. Her name was Elizabeth Ford Griffith. She was lying on her back on the floor. There was a small bloodstain around her left breast. A gun was at her side.  

One thing that the Corner found particularly odd was that she was dressed only in a short slip and a hospital dress. She had on long stockings and shoes. While he was investigating the body, Dr. Schott again suggested it was suicide. So the Corner checked for signs that she had done this to herself. One missing thing was the tale-tale signs of powder burns that the gun and bullet produce when it fires and hits something at close range. There were no burns on the girl’s clothing or body, which suggested that Elizabeth did not do this to herself. He estimated that she was shot sometime between noon and 3 pm.  

When Detectives arrived, they first examined Elizabeth’s body, and then they asked to speak to Dr. Schott to get his statement. He said that he and 13-year-old Laurine Gardner, who was a local girl he knew, had left the office to deliver some Christmas presents to some of his patients at noon. Elizabeth was in the office, cleaning and handling the phone. The office needed cleaning pretty bad, and she would be busy for most of the afternoon.  

The Doctor told the police that while they were out delivering presents, he called his office to see if there were any messages for him. Back then, when you made a phone call, you would talk to an operator first, then they would connect the call to the correct line. When no one answered, Dr. Schott thought that the line was busy, but the operator told the Dr. that it was not a busy signal, but it just kept ringing, and no one had answered.  

Dr. Schott became annoyed at Elizabeth. He said that he thought that she was cleaning and ignoring the phone. When he returned to the office with little Laurine, he found that a patient was waiting outside. The door was still locked, and she waited to see if someone would let her in. So, Dr. Schott unlocked the door with a knife and let everyone in.  

He said he was annoyed because the office looked as if it hadn’t been cleaned at all. He said he called out for Elizabeth several times. When she didn’t answer, he looked for her in the back room. That’s where he found her.   

The police asked Dr. Schott about the gun that was found, and he confirmed that it was his. He kept it at his office for protection. Elizabeth knew about the gun and never said anything about it one way or another.  

The police asked about Elizabeth, what was going on in her life, who she was seeing, and he knew about her. The Dr. told them that she was engaged to Captian George Jordan of the seventh Field Artillery, First Division. They were to be married on Christmas Day but had recently changed the wedding date. He also told them that he, too, had been engaged to her at one point in time. They had been together when she was younger.  

The Detective was taken aback and asked how old she was. The Dr. said that she was 17. But when they saw each other, she had lied to him about her age. She was 14 at that time. When they had split up, she met the Captian, and they soon fell in love. But he admitted that she still had feelings for him as well, and he too for her.  

The police took the Doctor at his word. So far, there was nothing to charge him with, even though he was quickly becoming their prime suspect. But they now had another name to look into, Captian George Jordan, and they needed to speak to Elizabeth’s parents as well. But for good measure, the police took the Doctor into the police station while they ran down other leads and decided if they had any further questions for him.  

Because they didn’t know when Elizabeth had been shot, police started canvassing the neighborhood. They wanted to talk to anyone who heard the gunshot. Hopefully, they knew what time it was.  

The first place Detectives went was to Elizabeth’s parent’s house. They had to inform Mr. and Mrs. John T Griffith that their Daughter was dead. They were both in shambles, and Mrs. Griffith openly sobbed. They spoke about Elizabeth’s relationship with Captian George Jordan. How they planned to marry but had to put it off for a few days.  

The Detectives asked about her relationship with Dr. Schott, and they told the Detectives that they believed that their relationship was over. Still, they were uneasy with her working for her former fiance. Dr. Schott was a bit of a playboy, and they didn’t know what was going on behind closed doors. The Detectives asked if there were any other men in Elizabeth’s life. Anyone who wanted to do her harm or wanted to stop her from getting married and they told the Detectives that there was no one. 

Detectives also spoke to Katie May Griffith, Elizabeth’s little sister. She stated that she called the office to talk to her sister around 2 pm. When she called, Dr. Schott answered the phone. She knew it was him by the sound of his voice. This was a direct contradiction to what the Dr had been telling everyone.  

Police then visited Captian George Jordan. They asked him to come into the station, and they told him what had happened. Immediately after being told about Elizabeth’s murder, he broke down and began to cry. They had to rule him out as a suspect, so they asked him where he was that afternoon. He gave them the names of his superiors with who he was working. They and his other squadmates all provided rock steady alibis. There was no way that the Captian had anything to do with the murder. They let him go and promised to catch whoever did this. 

***Add****

On December 26th, Feeling as if they had enough to go forward, the Chief of Detectives went looking for Dr. Schott. He had been let go in the early hours of Christmas morning. They checked his house and office. Both were empty. They received word that the Dr. might be at Attorney Moxley’s office. He was recently hired by the Dr. and would be handling things for him.  

When they arrived at Moxley’s office, The Detectives and Officers went straight in. There were five or six people in the room. Little Laurene Gardener, the 13-year-old girl, was sitting at Dr. Schott’s side. The Detective stepped forward and announced, “Doctor, your under arrest.” 

“Have you a warrant?” said Dr. Schott.

“I dont need any warrent,” the Detective replied. 

Dr. Schott wisely complied with the orders and went with the Detectives. They also took Laurene with them as well, they had not yet interviewed her, and they needed her statement.  

Now, they were arresting the Doctor for the murder of Elizabeth, but to charge him with the murder and go forward with the trial. They would need to convince a grand jury of his guilt.  

The Detectives separated Laurene from the Doctor to interview her. The paper recorded the interview, “The Owensboro Messanger dated December 27th, 1919, and was front-page news. This is what was said. 

Laurene Gardener talked freely while waiting in the office.  

She said she was very fond of Dr. Schott and was at his home quite a good deal. She said that she and Dr. Schott started from his office at 10 o’clock Wednesday morning and delivered a number of Christmas gifts in the West End. About 1 o’clock they returned and were preparing some more gifts to be delivered.

The little girl said:

“As we were wrapping up presents, Elizabeth said to Dr. Schott, “Will you answer one question seriously and tell me the truth?” ‘Dr. Schott answered, “Well, it’s owing to what it is.” 

“Elizabeth said: ‘For whom is that ivory manicure set?’ ” 

“Dr. Schott, in a teasing way, said: ‘You don’t need to know, do you?’ “

Laurene Gardener said that at that, Elizabeth started to cry, and Dr. Schott said to her: “If you want it, you can have it. I’ll buy another.”

Miss Griffith answered: “No, I don’t want it.” “About 1:15 we left on the second trip,” continued the child. 

“Elizabeth had stopped crying, came to the folding doors, and started to mop up the floor. We delivered seven packages, and at about 3 o’clock, we got back to the Doctor’s house. 

“The Doctor was again with me all the time. He would stay in the machine (Another word used back then for a car), and I would take the packages into the houses. When we got back to Dr. Schott’s Office, I was the first one out of the machine. I went to the front door, which was open. Dr. Schott came right behind me. As we went up, Mrs. Gerlach followed behind us. The folding doors were hooked, and the Doctor knocked on them and called ‘Elizabeth.’ “There was no answer. He took his knife, slipped it in the door, and unlatched them. The mop and bucket had been turned over in this room, and there was water all over the floor.

“Elizabeth was lying in the third room on her back. The revolver was a foot beside her. The Doctor took out something, put it to his ears, and listened to her heart and lungs. He felt her eyes and then went into the middle room and used the telephone.  

Dr. Schott, who was now in a prison cell, asked that they talk to Miss Jennie Brands, who spoke to Elizabeth through the day. She knew that Elizabeth was alive when the Dr. was away. She had called him and told him what transpired.

The Detectives did just that. They went down to Miss Brands’ home to ask her about her story and hear for themselves what she had to say. The Courier-Journal reported the interview in Louisville, Kentucky, on December 27th, 1919, and was featured on page three. 

“I received a bill from Dr. Schott, which had been settled a year ago. At 9 o’clock Wednesday morning, I called his office to get the matter straightened out. Miss Griffith answered the phone, informing me that the Doctor was out delivering Christmas presents and asked me to call in fifteen minutes. Determined to reach the physician, I followed her instructions, called up at fifteen-minute intervals until 4 o’clock.

“Perhaps it will seem strange, but as the day grew older, the girl’s voice seemed to change. In the morning, her mood was cheerful. After dinner, it was sad.”

“I felt something was worrying her. She sounded as though overcome by some great grief. I remember her saying: “Have you received your Christmas presents?”

“I told her that I expected no presents and that I was not bothered about anticipating them or getting them. Then I asked if she had received and. Brokenly, as though sobbing, she replied: “I don’t know. Christmas presents mean nothing. I am too sad. Too sad to care.’

“It didn’t sound like the Miss Griffith I had talked to earlier in the day.”

“Now, I believe she was wounded at the time I paid little attention to her talk. Being a trifle angry at receiving a bill I had paid. I called again at 2:30 but received no answer. After that, I called until about 4 o’clock, when Dr. Schott answered the phone and, in a not excited tone, said: “A serious thing has happened.” 

Now, there are only a couple of scenarios that I can come up with that explains what might have happened in this case. Given what has been told so far, it is conceivable that Elizabeth had become sad about what was supposed to be her wedding eve. Perhaps she was still in love with the Doctor, and the sight of a nice manicure set going out to someone as a present made her believe that he had moved on. Perhaps she had thought about it, taken the gun from the Doctors office, and killed herself in a way that no powder burns were produced.  

It’s also possible that the Doctor did indeed commit the murder himself. If he did, he might have been using the young Laurene as a nieve alibi. If she were waiting in the car and the Doctor shot Elizabeth on their way out. Perhaps she didn’t hear or know what was going on. But the Doctor also admitted that he was dating Elizabeth when she was 14 years old. Maybe he had seduced Laurene, who seemed quite taken with the Doctor in her statement to the police. If so, she might be fully aware of what really happened and was determined to help the Doctor no matter what.  

What really speaks to this is the statement from Mrs. Brands. She said she had been calling every 15 minutes since 9 am. But if that was the case, why didn’t the Doctor talk to her when he was in the office? She said that after dinner, she called again, and it didn’t sound like the same Elizabeth she was talking to earlier in the day. Perhaps she wasn’t talking to Elizabeth? Maybe it was Laurene?

On December 27th, the state attorneys press forward with the charges of Murder against Dr. Schott. Now they will have to convince a grand jury of his guilt to formally charge the Doctor with murder. This would be the decision of the decade, and it was only a grand jury hearing.  

Nextime on Forgotten True crime, we will continue with part two of this case. Make sure you subscribe so that when that episode comes out, you will be the first to know.  

I will see you all next time. See ya! 

Hello everyone, I hope you are all well. I have been doing a lot of research for the 12 Days of Murder – The True Crime Christmas-related murder cases. This story, “The Accidental Murder,” is fascinating, but there’s not much to the story so I thought it would make a great post on the blog and not a standalone story on the Podcast.

On Christmas Eve 1892, In Bermingham, Alabama. Will Buckalew had been drinking whiskey, probably too much whiskey. He met up with his brother, and soon enough, they had got into a heated argument that was about to come to blows. Boy Varnum witnessed all of this happening, and he stepped in to help separate the two. When he did so, Will drew a pistol and shot at his brother. The ball missed his brother and hit Boy in the neck. The wound was severe, and Boy died within moments.

Even in his drunken state, Will knew that he was in trouble. He fled from the murder scene and was chased by those who witnessed the events. One of those witnesses was Geo Herett, a local Constable.

Will panicked when he saw the small crowd of people chasing him. He fired his pistol several times at his attackers but missed hitting anyone. A conductor in the crowd received a minor wound to the head, and Geo’s coat had two holes going through it, so Will was close to killing more people.

Will shooting at them only enraged the crowd more. Constable Geo Herett knew that if he were not stopped, Will would be lynched before being arrested.

They finally subdued Will, and he was taken prisoner. They loaded him up in a wagon and took him to the local jail. He fought all the way there, offering the men who had to hold him down 50 dollars if they would let him go. When in jail, Will continued to fight. He threatened and cursed at everyone with who he interacted with. Eventually, he was let in with the other prisoners, the guard who led him received a punch in the jaw by Will. It caught him by surprise and turned him around like a top.

Will’s trial wasn’t until November of 1893. He was found guilty of murder and was sentenced to 5 years of hard labor. Will was assigned to work in the Pratt Mines.

After being in the mines for a week, a blast loosened a rock that fell and stuck Will. It crushed him, and he died instantly.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “A Fatal Decision in New York,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Hello everyone, I hope you are well. We got a unique story for you today, one that keeps going, even after the verdict. I really like these because they give me many more avenues to research and find little tidbits about each person in different parts of their lives. You would be surprised how much can be found when you do a little digging.

This story takes place during World War I in Binghamton, New York.

Albert Latham knew this time was coming, and when it did, he didn’t fight it. During the great war, some 2.8 million Americans would be drafted into military service. The one thing that he was worried about was that he and his wife had been separated for some time. They tried to stay together, but things were just not working out.

But in light of being drafted and going to war. Albert contacted his wife, Gertrude, and asked if he could write her while he was gone. Gertrude agreed but made no promises that she would often write back.

But as the war went on and the letters kept coming in, Gertrude started writing back. For many on the battlefield, it was letters like these that helped them survive. For Albert and Gertrude, it was how they fell back in love with each other.

Albert survived the war and came back a family hero. He served his country and saved his marriage. They decided that living apart was no longer needed, and they found a beautiful home, number 4 Highland Avenue in Binghamton (Bing-him-ton), New York.

Actually, if you google that address, you will find that the home is still standing. It’s in a charming neighborhood and has been well-loved.

When the couple first moved in, they were known as the cute loving couple. But it didn’t take long for all of that to change. Over the next couple of years, they would soon be known as the couple that was always fighting.

In 1922, things were particularly hard for the Latham family. Albert had been laid off from several jobs, and Gertrude was trying to make ends meet by working in a shoe factory. Their tempers were as high as ever at home due to the day-to-day stress building up.

Then on one faithful day of Friday, March 3rd, 1922, 5 unmistakable gunshots were heard. They came from number 4 Highland Avenue. Albert came limping from the home. He clutched his hand, which was bleeding profusely and was also bleeding from a head wound. He looked as if he were in a terrible state. He quickly went to a neighbors house. One that he knew could help him. It was the home of Officer Earl D. Fish.

Earl’s wife attended to Alberts wounds as Earl made a phone call to the local station. He relayed the information that Albert told him. That his wife had a gun and had shot him and threatened to shoot herself. Moments later, Captian Lewis DeWitt and several other officers arrived and stormed the Latham home. There they found 28-year-old Gertrude Latham dead on the floor.

Right away, Detectives were on the scene, and they knew that there was something fishy going on. They found Gertrude, dead, in the bedroom doorway and lying on the floor, face down. The gun was on the floor on the other side of the room. Detectives believed that if she had shot herself, it would be next to her body. The other thing that worried Detectives was the number of times she supportively shot herself. She had three wounds, two to the chest and one to the head. It’s not uncommon for a suicide attempt to fail, causing the person to try again, but something about this didn’t add up.

Albert was taken to the hospital. They worked on his hand the best they could. It was severely damaged from the shot. The doctor asked Albert how he got the wound on his head, and Albert didn’t quite know. He told the doctor that he believed that when he looked down at his wounded hand, he thought his wife hit him with the butt of the gun. Upon examination, it was found that the wound was actually a bullet graze, just inches away from striking his brain and killing him instantly.

When interviewed by Detectives, Albert was still in the hospital, and they pressed Albert for details on what had happened. They wanted to get his story down as quickly as possible. Albert started telling a story, and this was his statement.

“My wife befriended a disreputable woman, and they began hanging around. I asked her time and again not to go with her and pleaded with her to stay away from the woman, but still, she continued to accompany her to wild parties. She had a terrible temper, but I loved her just the same. I don’t know why she should try and take my life, for I have always treated her on the square.”

“Last night when I went home to supper, she was apparently preparing herself for another party, and again I pleaded with her to cut that woman out. After supper, we went into the dining room.”

“This is situated between the parlor and the kitchen. We had a chat. I tried to tell her what a terrible woman this married companion of hers was. I didn’t seem able to impress her, so I finally decided to leave the house forever. I told her several days ago that I would leave her, as I did before the World War, several years after our marriage, but she didn’t seem to care whether I did or not. But last night, I was determined to leave and leave for good.”

“I left the dining room and walked into the bedroom. She was following directly behind me. I took my hat and coat down off the hook and placed them on the bed. Then I walked over to the dresser and placed several little articles together. She was in the room all this time, and I looked up at her. I could nearly tell that something was running through her mind. I walked over and picked up my traveling bag, which was standing in back of the bedroom door, and placed it alongside of be dresser.”

“It was when I placing my collars and ties in the bag that she first attacked me. She had the gun in her hand, and the only thing I could do was grab her and hold on. It was in the dresser drawer where I had all of my collars.”

The Detective immediately asked, “How did she get ahold of the gun when you were standing in front of the dresser?”

Albert replied, “I had just bent down to put some of the collars in the bag when she reached over my shoulder and grabbed it.”

“I dropped the collars I had in my hand and dove for her just as she was preparing to shoot. She had the gun clutched tight in her hand, and I couldn’t take it from her. I grappled with her for several moments, trying my best to make her drop it on the floor. I had my hand around the muzzle of the gun and was pushing her arm back when she pulled the trigger, and a bullet whizzed through my hand. It stunned me, and I lost my power. I let her go then, and I walked over to the door, never believing that she would fire another shot. I was standing near the room, my head bowed down, holding my hand to keep the blood from flowing rapidly, when I received an awful jolt. I didn’t know if she shot me or hit me on the head with the butt of the gun until I arrived here at the hospital, and the doctor told me that I had two bullet wounds, one in the head and one on the hand.”

It was then he suggested this was the moment he would flee from the house, and she soon after took her own life.

Alberts story quickly made its way to the press. Many believed the story of a domestic squabble gone bad. Some questioned whether or not Albert was genuinely telling the whole story. Little did Albert know, his wife’s autopsy was just completed just hours after his statement to the police was made, and it told a completely different story.


The Corner was very quick with its assessment of the case. They found that Gertrude was shot once in the back of the head. This did not kill her. They also looked at the two wounds on her chest. One of the bullet wounds was in her back, so they knew she was shot from behind. The other was in the front and was in the heart and was the fatal wound. The Corner believed that Gertrude died just moments after this shot.

There was no way that Gertrude could have shot herself in the back. This information was quickly relayed to the police Detectives on the case, who immediately returned to interview Albert again in the hospital.

Things were a little different now. They let Albert tell his story, they took everything down words for word, and now they had the evidence to show that what he told them was not the truth. They would be able to leverage this when they pressed him for a confession to what really happened.

Albert was surprised that the Detectives were back to interview him so quickly. He was probably glad that they had gone. But when they returned, they had come back with challenging questions that Albert would have to answer.

Right away, they reminded Albert of what he had told them. Then they told him about the autopsy and how it didn’t match up with his story. Albert seemed shocked and ashamed as they described the wounds to the back of the head and how horrible it all was.

At first, he tried to deny killing his wife, but then he broke down and started confessing to what really happened.

You see, Albert had become suspicious that his wife had been going out with other men. She would go to work and then the theater before returning home. This was on top of going out with friends and meeting new people.

Albert was jealous that his wife was becoming independent and suspected that she was being helped along by another man in her life. So, on the morning of the murder. Albert kissed his wife goodbye as she left for work. She told him that she would be going to the theater and meet her on Court street at 10PM if he wanted to walk her home.

Albert was determined to see if his wife was actually going to the theater or if she was going somewhere else with another man. So that day, he stopped at the store, and he bought bullets for his gun. Then when he got home, Albert loaded the weapon, and he stated that he placed it in the side table drawer.

Then, around the time she got off work, Albert waited near the theater to see if his wife showed up and if anyone was with her. He waited and waited, but in the crowd that came and went, he didn’t see her. So then he waited near the place that his wife told him that she would be meeting him. By this time, Albert had spent all evening trying to catch his wife cheating on him. All this time, he was working up these ideas and thoughts in his mind about what could possibly be going on.

Then around 10PM, he spotted his wife in the distance. Albert stated that he thought he saw her say good night to another man. She then proceeded down the street, and Albert then waved her down, and she spotted him and then walked up to him.

Albert immediately started asking about the other man and accusing Gertrude of cheating on him. Gertrude refused to fight in public. She hated looking like a couple that fought, even though many knew that they did and often.

So they went home, and as soon as they walked through the front door, Albert again accused Gertrude of stepping out on their marriage. Gertrude denied the accusations, and according to Alberts’s confession, he then told Gertrude that he was leaving her, and that’s when he walked to the bedroom to gather his things.

He stated that Gertrude followed him, and when she saw the gun, she grabbed it. Albert grabbed the front of the weapon, and Gertrude fired it, shooting through his hand. Albert then screamed, and this alarmed Gertrude, who let go of the gun. Albert then took the gun, and he pointed it at her. She then turned her head away, and he fired it, striking her in the back of the head. He then said that he grabbed her before she could fall, and he tried to kiss her, as if he were coming to his senses and wanted to make up. But she pushed him away and called him a coward. This enraged Albert even more, and he then shot her two more times, once in the chest and once in the back. He stated that her last words were, “Oh, Al…”

The Detectives took down Albert’s statement, and then they had him sign it so that it would be near impossible to fight if he changed his story later.

Albert was arrested, and once he was released from the hospital, he was booked in the local jail to be held for trial.

The trial was set to begin in June 1922, just 3 months after the murder. Albert was able to get an attorney, and together, they put together a deal for the state. Albert would plead guilty to second-degree murder, a lesser charge than what he was initially charged with, first-degree murder.

The state didn’t take long to think about it. The trial would set them back 12 thousand dollars. Adjusting for inflation, that’s about 197 thousand dollars in 2021 American dollars. They also didn’t know if they could prove that Albert planned the murder ahead of time, something they would have to prove for a first-degree murder charge. So they accepted the deal and dropped the charge to second-degree murder.

In June of 1922, Albert was sentenced to life in prison. This carried a minimum of 20 years in prison. He was initially sent to the Auburn Prison.

Through the years, Albert served his time well. He quickly started working within the prison and worked his way up to a full trustee, who the guards believed could be trusted. He was then assigned to a road camp where the workers would spend their time working on and repairing highways.

These camps were not guarded well, and the prisoners were kept in army-style tents instead of prison cells. On July 28th, 1930, three inmates walked out of camp and escaped. One of them was Albert.


The odd thing about this was that Albert was coming up for review for parole. He didn’t know it, but they were about to look over his case and see if they could let him out early for good behavior. This escape ruined that chance.

He was caught in Courtland, New York, when he asked for a ride from a truck driver. The truck driver became suspicious about Albert’s behavior when he was dropped off on the side of the highway, and he saw Albert run into the woods as if he were getting out of sight. The truck driver alerted the police just in case and gave a description of the person he was giving a ride to. They searched the area and found Albert, who was trying to hide out.

A year later Albert came up for parole in 1931 and was denied. This would happen three more times until 1937, he would be given his freedom. He moved into the Courtland YMCA after his release, only to find out how hard life would be after prison.

On September 14th, 1938, Albert committed suicide. He was found by workers at the YMCA who helped him with housing.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “One Night in San Francisco,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. Make sure you go there and check it out.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Your life can change in an instant. One day your here, and the same day you’re gone. It’ll happen to us all, but yet for many of us; we don’t often think about it. It’s perfectly normal not to. We live our lives like we will live forever, but we all know the truth. We also live our lives assuming that we will live well into old age. If I stay healthy and in shape, I have a good chance of a long and happy life. That is unless someone decides to take it away from me.

One thing I take comfort in is that we live in an age where if I’m murdered, there’s a good chance that enough evidence will be left behind in some way that they at least have a shot at solving the crime. I think the Gabby Petito case is a good example. They knew where to search because someone happened to be driving by in the area where they were camping. That driver just so happened to have had a camera recording their trip, and they could see the couple’s van in that video.

But what would they do in the 1890s? This is way before anything like DNA, Video Surveillance, and the like. This case is an excellent example of policing in the late 19th century, and I hope you all enjoy the story. This was initially written in the book Celebrated Criminal Cases of America by Thomas Duke, in the public domain. It has since been rewritten and researched by myself. I hope you enjoy it.

Around 1AM on August 17th, 1890, Samuel Jacobson staggered into his home on 2300 California street in San Fransisco. He could hardly walk, and he was bleeding profusely. He lit the wall lantern in the entryway with a shaking hand, and then he called for his mother.

It didn’t take long for his mother to respond. She was asleep but had been awakened by a loud bang outside. When she went downstairs, she screamed at the sight. Her son was in the hallway, bleeding and trying to stay standing. Soon after her screams, two other men arrived at the home. Both of them had heard the bang sound and came to investigate. The three of them helped Samuel to his bed, and before they could go to get help, a fourth person arrived at the Jacobson home, Police Officer Warnick.

Officer Warnick had heard the bang. He lived nearby and was sound asleep when it woke him. He knew that sound anywhere. It was the sound of a gunshot. He ran out toward where he thought the sound had come from. When he didn’t see anyone on the street, he thought he might have gone the wrong way. But then he heard the screams of Samuel’s mother and knew he was in the right area.


When Officer Warnick arrived at the Jacobson home. He was told that Samuel was shot by footpads in the area. So Officer Warnick sent word to Captain Douglass about the shooting, and he then searched the surrounding area for the footpads.

Now, the word footpad might have some of you scratching your heads. It’s a term used widely until the 20th century, which meant pretty much the same thing as a mugger. At the time, a highwayman would have been on a horse, a footpad would have been on foot. At this time in San Francisco’s history, it was perilous to go out and walk the streets at night. Even if you went with a friend, you were always running the chance of getting robbed on the streets.

Now, Officer Warnick looked in the area but didn’t find anyone. He didn’t expect to find them seeing that the shooter had a lot of time to get away. By the time he returned to the Jacobson home, he had found that a Doctor had arrived and attended to Samuel. The Officer asked to speak to Samuel, who was still awake but in terrible pain, and the Doctor refused to let him. He was afraid that if Samuel gave a dying declaration, he would give up on life and die soon after. The Doctor wanted Samuel alert and fighting for his life.

Police Captain Douglass soon arrived at the scene, and he too asked to Speak to Samuel, but the Doctor refused him. They then questioned the others in the home. The two men who helped Samuel reported that they heard the shot and came to investigate what had happened. One of them was a Chinese American. He was a Chinatown guide, and he was getting off of a cablecar in the area. After he heard the shot, he looked around the area, he saw no one else. The other person was a young man. He said that he was accompanying his sister to the drug store, and they were on their way back when he heard the shot. He ran as fast as he could toward the noise to see what had happened. He told the police that he believed that the shot didn’t happen on the street. He thought it happened in the house.

Sylvain Weill, a very close friend to Samuel, was permitted to see him the next day. The Doctor thought that seeing a friend would help Samuel. Although Samuel was in a lot of pain, he related what had happened that night before. Sylvain wrote down everything his friend told him in hopes that it would help catch the person who did this. This is what he said.

“I had just jumped off a California streetcar at 12:30 and was about to turn into my gate when two men got in front of me, and one of them cried, ‘Put up your hands!’ I thought it was a joke being played on me by one of my friends, and being somewhat nearsighted, I grabbed one of them in fun. Just as I did so, the other man called out: ‘Give it to him, Bill!’ The man whom I was grabbing then put a pistol to my side and fired. I have had no trouble with anybody that I know of and know no reason why anybody should have shot me!”

He then went on to give vague descriptions of the two men. One was short, and the other was tall. He couldn’t give much since they were both wearing masks.

When Sylvain left, he knew that this would probably be the last time he talked to his good friend. Samuel was not looking well and was in a lot of pain. Although they had stopped most of the bleeding, he still had a bullet in him that did who knows what damage lodged in his stomach.

Police started investigating this case by talking to everyone who lived in the area. Canvasing the neighborhood is a great starting point because it was still believed that this happened on the street, and if so, someone might have witnessed the crime before, during, or after it happened. Detective Bohen was assigned to the case. He wanted to speak to the cable car conductor to see if he had witnessed anything. The Conductor would be working that night, and he would talk to him then. The Detective also spoke to Mr. Hickox, who was a janitor at Cooper’s Medical College. Mr. Hickox stated that he was on his way home and was in the area of the crime just before it happened. He saw two men in the streets lamplight just ahead of him. He was worried about them because he did not notice them before, and this area was pretty well lit. So, unless they quietly exited a house and made no noise doing so, he believed that they were in hiding and only had just come out. Luckily, he didn’t have to approach the two men. Mr. Hickox lived in a house just up the street from them, and he quickly entered and then gave the two men little thought until he heard the gunshot minutes later. Mr. Hickox said that he was getting ready for bed and heard the shot. Shortly after, he looked through his window, being careful not to be seen, and saw no one on the streets. The two men were gone.

While the Detective was getting these statements, he soon found out that his case went from an assault case to a murder case. Samuel Jacobson died on August 19th.


Now, one of the problems that the San Francisco Police Department had at the time was that some of the police and Detectives would freely speak to the press about ongoing cases. Even if they were well removed from the case, some didn’t mind giving out their theory or what they had heard what the current view the case detectives have. In this case, several officers and detectives began tossing out ideas about suicide, murder from a rival, and that his family was in on it.

Suicide was something that was not completely disproven. The fact that no one had seen the crime, the lack of evidence that the crime happened on the street, and that it appeared that the shot was very close range, close enough that Samuel could have done it himself, kept this theory alive.

They also looked to Samuel’s love life and found that he did have a rival. Someone that threatened him in the past. You see, Samuel was good friends with a man named Joe Schwartz. Joe was seeing a woman named Miss Ida Kirchner. Joe was in love with her, and he wanted to introduce her to his friends. So, one day he had introduced Ida to Samuel, and Samuel became somewhat obsessed with the young lady. Soon after, Ida left Joe for Samuel. It was well known that Joe never forgave Samuel, but he had also moved away and had not come back to San Francisco since.

So, to test both of those theories, the Detectives talked to Miss Ida Kirchner. She had been with Samuel the night of the murder, and she recounted their history. This is her statement.

“I met Mr. Jacobson when I was keeping Company with Mr. Schwartz,” she said. “I was at the time living in Oakland, but shortly afterward came over to this city to live. I first began to associate with Mr. Jacobson twelve months ago, the 1st day of last July, and since that time, he has been assiduous in his attentions. Five months ago, we became engaged to be married, and he gave me a ring. His family objected to the marriage, and we deferred it from time to time. He was a kind and considerate friend and came to see me every night of the week, generally staying from 10 to 11 o’clock. The last time I saw him was Saturday night when we went to the Orpheum Theatre. He returned home with me and said ‘good night’ to my mother and me about a quarter past 11.”

The Detective asked, “Did you have any unpleasant words that night, on the street or in the house?”

Ida replied, “Not one. I am sure I was unusually pleasant because he told me he was tired.”

The Detective then asked, “Was there anything unusual in his conduct? Had he been drinking?”

Ida again replied, “No, Certainly not to excess.”

The Detective asked, “Did he speak of suicide?”

Ida quickly replied, “Why no; he had a great dread of it. Sometimes when I came home from work tired and said: ‘I wish I were dead,’ he would lecture me terribly.”

After interviewing Ida, Detectives would run down every lead that they had. But eventually, they had none. They could not find a solid reason why someone would have shot and killed Samuel unless it was a robbery gone wrong.

Weeks would go by without a break in the case. Those weeks would turn into months. The only thing that came out in the news was continued theories and rumors about the case, but no solid leads.

It wasn’t until police Detectives met a man named Edward Campbell, a sewing machine solicitor, that they finally gained some leads. Edward met Detectives Hogan and Silvey and attempted to become friendly with them. But instead of being a friend, he appeared fake, and they suspected that he had other motives for being their friend.

Edward wanted to appear helpful to the Detectives and pointed them in the direction of some big busts. They suspected that this was to gain favor with them so that if he were to get in trouble in the future, they would help him. One of these busts led to the arrest of Charles Schmidt, who was in possession of some of the items stolen by two robbers who fit the description of the two footpads who killed Samuel.

After that bust, Edward asked the Detectives, who he believed were his friends, a curious question. He asked that if someone were involved in a crime with someone else, and one person killed someone without talking to the other person about it first, then would the person who had not planned on murdering anyone and had not assisted in any way be responsible?

The detectives gave a noncommital answer, playing it cool. But they quickly pieced it together, Edward Campbell was somehow involved in the murder of Samuel. So they arrested Edward and brought him into the station.

Samuel refused to speak about the crime, but from the talk earlier, they were convinced that he had not committed the murder, but he knew who did. So, in exchange for confessing, they offered Samuel immunity for the murder. That deal was too good to pass up, and Samuel confessed. This is his confession.

“In May, 1890, I was sent out with Sydney Bell to canvass for the Singer sewing machine. We became confidential and Bell suggested that I assist him in robbing belated pedestrians. After some hesitancy I consented and we executed several ‘jobs’ successfully.”

“On the night of August 17, I met Bell at my home, 235 Clara street, and we traveled out through the Western Addition. Bell showed me a 32-calibre revolver and a policeman’s club loaded with lead. Throughout the entire evening I protested against robbing anyone and Bell became provoked at me.”

“We arrived at Webster and California streets after midnight, and I told him that I intended to take the next eastbound California-street car and go home. Before it arrived, a westbound car passed, and a man whom I have since learned was Samuel Jacobson alighted, and, without consulting me, Bell went up to him and commanded him to throw up his hands. Jacobson grabbed Bell, who fired a shot, and then Bell and I ran along Webster street and started for town. When we separated, Bell said that he would get someone that night. “He came to my house the next night and stated that he had robbed a fellow of $240 after we parted that morning.”

Edward informed the police that he was going to meet with Sydney Bell later that day. If they wanted to arrest him, they would not have to look for him. They agreed to let Edward go with a police guard. Edward went home, and they waited for Sydney to arrive. When Sydney came to Edward’s door, police surrounded him and arrested him. He had on him the pistol and club that was described in the confession.

The trial of Sydney Bell was swift. The evidence brought forward was the confession of Edward, Samuels statement, which fit the confession, and the gun found on Sydney after he was arrested. Besides that, there was not a lot of evidence that directly showed that Sydney had anything to do with the murder or that he was the one who pulled the trigger. The trial began on April 22nd, 1892, and ended on May 7th. Sydney was found guilty of the three robberies he was charged with, and he was found guilty of murder in the first degree. Which is punishable by death.

After the trial, Sydney Bell was sent to death row. But he later was able to appeal his sentence and get a retrial. This time Sydney did not fight the robbery charges. He accepted them. He pled not guilty to the murder charge, and this time it worked out in Sydney’s favor. He was acquitted of that charge and was sentenced to 60 years in prison for the robberies.

Sydney would be later be paroled in 1909

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Murder of Lottie Yates,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into. We have the original news reports to read through, and some really cool history about the case passed down through the years.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Those of you who are long-time listeners will not be surprised that I unusually came upon this case while doing some research. It caught my attention, and I thought it was a pretty compelling story to tell. When I first read the case, I didn’t find a whole lot on it. But it wasn’t until I noticed that the library of congress had a folk song about the case, I decided to do some more digging. What I found was a sad story of violence, jealousy, and a miscarriage of justice.

This story first takes place in the year 1891 in a little town called Greenup, Kentucky. To give you a town visual, it was built up against the Ohio River.

Charlotte “Lottie” Yates was 17 years old when she decided to leave her husband, who soon after they married became violent towards her. He began to drink, and that only made things worse. She had a baby and had more than just herself to think about, and not wanting to raise a child in such a home, she got help from her family to force him to leave their home, and then she divorced him.

Lottie’s husband was Austin Porter. He was known as a jealous and possessive man. He was enraged that he had been removed from his own home and that Lottie would not take him back. He spent the better part of a year trying to get them back, but she refused.

Lottie had been working on a plan on getting out and away from Austin once and for good. She was going to go and stay with her father, but she had to get everything in order before she make the move. Lottie’s little sister came to visit with her to help with the move and help with the new baby.

On May 26th, 1892, Almost one year after Lottie left Austin, Austin returned to his former home at 3AM. He went to each door, trying to gain entry into the house but found that they were all locked. He then decided to stack some large rocks outside the bedroom window so that he could look in and see if it was unlocked. Looking through the window, Austin could see Lottie, her sister, and the baby sleeping on the bed. When he tried the open the window, he found it unlocked.

Now, Austin didn’t return home to try and convince his wife to let him come back. He intended on ending things once and for all. He brought a large knife with him. As he crept to the bed, he drew the knife out and swiftly stabbed Lottie. Lottie’s scream woke up her sister and the baby, who immediately began crying. Austin was startled by the commotion. It was suspected that he had been drinking and was probably drunk at the time. He then fled the home almost as quickly as he had come. He dropped the knife in front of the house as he ran.

Lottie’s stab wound was profound because it had severed an artery. Within a minute, she was dead. Lottie’s sister ran for help, and the authorities were notified. But before they could put together a search for Austin, an angry mob of local townspeople formed, and they too wanted to find him.

You see, back in these times, there was another possibility of what was considered “Justice,” and that was lynching. This was now going to be a race to see who could find Austin first, the Police or the angry mob.

Both parties believed that Austin had fled into the mountains, and that’s where the searches began. Austin knew this area well, and it would be hard to find him in his element. When interviewed just after the murder. Members of the mob stated that they wanted to see Austin burn for his crimes. They planned on burning him alive.

Austin was able to evade capture for just over a week. On the 8th day, he was found, and several locals were able to capture him, and they delivered him to authorities. For Austin, this was a best-case scenario. If the wrong people found him, he would have been lynched.

Austin was returned to Greenup, where he was charged, and he was placed in the county jail in Grayson, a town further south in Kentucky. When questioned about the crime. Austin flat out refused to confess that he killed his wife, and he was able to hire an attorney to represent him in the matter.

Knowing that a trail was going to take place and things were already heated. The County Attorney called in Lottie’s family to have a talk with them. You see, when Austin was caught, a mob had formed from a nearby town of Willard. This is where the victim’s family is from. When these mobs get out of control, it’s impossible for little towns like Grayson to be able to stop them from doing what they want. So the county attorney made a deal with the victim’s family. If Austin was kept in Jail in Greenup and the trial was speedy, they would not attempt to lynch him. The family agreed, and they addressed the rising mob and told them of the deal. Things were looking up for Austin in this regard because the crowd soon dispersed, and many of them went back home.

Although this sounded like a great deal for everyone involved. It was going to run the risk that the trial would be unfair. You see, the jury would be formed from locals, who all at this point would have developed some kind of opinion on the matter. So Austins and his Attorney talked about secretly trying to get the trial moved to another county. One where cooler heads might be in the jury.

These secret talks somehow got out. Either they were overheard, or someone said something to the wrong person. Either way, their plan was known and was spreading across town. Like any rumor, it quickly fell to the ears of those it affected the most, the victim’s family and the angry mob.

The mob that was estimated to be around 150 people formed. They were armed with rifles and were out for vengeance. They wanted to do this quickly before anyone had the chance to move Austin to a safer place where he would be out of reach.

The mob first went to the train station at midnight. They forced the engineer of the Eastern Kentucky Railroad to take them to the town of Grayson. The angry mob filled the train, and they told the conductor that if he blew the loud steam whistle, he would be killed.

When they were just a half-mile out of town, they stopped the train. This was just before 2AM. The mob walked into town, and any locals who came out to see what was going on was told to go back to bed, that this didn’t concern them. They marched to the last house on a row of houses. They surrounded it, and then someone went up and knocked on the front door.

A woman answered, and she looked pretty confused. The man representing the crowd asked to talk to her husband, and she said that he was upstairs. Three men then entered the home, and they brought out the husband, who was known as the Jailer for the county jail.

The crowd demanded the keys to the jail. The Jailer told them that he did not have them. He didn’t take them home. But no one believed him. They threatened the Jailer with his life, and at the request of his wife, who was frightened that the mob would kill her husband, he finally told them where the keys were in his home. The men entered and then left with the keys in hand.

The mob stayed at the Jailer’s house. They did not want him going to authorities and possibly stopping them from getting Austin. So they sent three men to the jail with the keys. Before they all left, the Jailer’s one request was that they not let out any other prisoners.

When the three men arrived at the jail, Austin knew that this would not end well for him. As they pulled him from his cell, he muttered to himself, “I am gone.” They then returned to the Jailer’s house. Auston asked the Jailer if he could pass on this one request, that he be buried next to his wife or if he was not allowed, he wanted to be buried next to his sister.

The mob bound Austin’s hands with a very thin rope. It was thinner than clothesline. They also used it to make a noose, and they placed it over his head. Austin started praying at this point.

They walked him a half-mile out of town onto a railroad bridge. They told Austin that this is where he was going to die if he did not confess to killing his wife. If he did, they would take him back to Willard, near the scene of the crime, and they would do the deed there. Austin was sobbing at this point, and he told the crowd what had happened. “I did it, but I did not know what I was doing,” he cried.

True to their word, the crowd then took Auston to the town of Willard, to a bridge over a creek. They fastened the rope around Austin’s neck and then to one of the railroad ties. They pushed Auston off the side of the bridge. When the rope came taught, it broke, and Austin fell into the creek. They pulled him out of the stream. Austin was still alive, and so they tried again. This time the rope heald and Austin hung until he was dead.

His body was left on display. As news traveled about the lynching, people from all around, young and old, came to see the sight. Later on that day, the Coroner arrived, and they cut him down.

The court case was ended. The jury issued a verdict on the case, and this was readout. “We, the jury, find, according to the evidence produced in teh case is Austin Porter, that he came to his death by strangulation of a rope, placed thereon for that purpose by whome we don’t know.”

This made national news but little happened afterward. Lynchings occurred in these areas, and it would not be until more reformed practices were put into place that they would stop.

Either way, I believe that Austin Porter was denied a fair trial. No, I don’t think he was innocent at all, but it’s not up to an angry mob to decide what should or should not happen in these matters. This is not a political statement. It’s just the truth. We built these laws around making sure that the accused has a fair trial and has the opportunity to appeal the decision against them.

But tell me what you think! You can follow me on Facebook. The links are in the description. You can also join us over at TrueCrime.Blog, where this story is posted along with a lot of other information.

I will see you all next time. See ya!

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Oklahoma Girl Scout Murders,” has a lot of exciting stuff for you to dig into.   

 Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.  

This is a big deal for me. We have done 50 episodes of the show, and I have enjoyed it every step of the way. When I first started Okie Investigations, I wasn’t quite sure what I would do with it. I had one idea for a show, and that was dashed away in 2020. So I decided to pivot to another concept that has slowly transformed into what we are today. Okie Investigations has transformed into Forgotten True Crime, and we have grown so much in the last few months.  

I want to thank each and every listener who has taken the time to listen to our show. This is a labor of love, and I hope you all subscribe and stick with us for the long run. Because we have a lot more stories to tell. 

For the 50th episode, I will do one that I have been saving since episode 1. We will cover the Oklahoma Girl Scout Murders. This has been requested over and over since I started this show, and today we will take a deep dive into it.  

Now, for those unfamiliar with this story, please be aware that it involves the murder of children and sexual abuse. If this is a trigger, please; listener discretion is advised.

Girl scouts is an excellent program that helps young girls learn a whole host of valuable skills. When I think of girl scouts, I think of the cookies that I buy almost every time I see them set up outside a store. They run these programs to fund extra programs like outings and camps, where they can continue to grow and become leaders.  

In 1977, things were not different. The scouts had worked hard raising money to earn their way into camp. For scouts in northeast Oklahoma, that meant there was a good chance you would be going to Camp Scott near Locust Grove, Oklahoma.  

Camp Scott first opened in August of 1928. Back then, it was called Camp Ma-Del-Co. I found an interesting article in the Mayes County Democrat that described what they had built for the scouts back then and how much it all cost. It was initially published on August 2nd, 1928, just days before the opening of the camp.  

In 1928, the camp was to run in two 5 day sections. If scouts wanted to just go the first 5 days, it would be 5 dollars to go. If they wanted to go all 10 days, it would be 9 dollars. This was just before the great depression, so this wasn’t overly expensive at the time.  

They had secured 240 acres for the camp and had built 20 buildings. They had a water and sewage plant, a large dining hall that could accommodate 150 scouts at a time, a modern kitchen, and different facilities to accommodate the many Scouts attending.  

At the time, this was a state-of-the-art camp. There was no better in Oklahoma, and if you wanted to ensure that your child was going to attend the best camp around, you were going to make sure they were going to this one. 

Now fast forward 49 years to 1977. Camp Ma-Del-Co is now Camp Scott. Other than that, little has changed. Besides a few modern updates, not a lot has actually changed in the camp. The girls had sold their cookies and had earned their way into Camp Scott’s two-week-long program. In all, there were around 100 girl scouts and approximately 40 staff members in the camp.  

As each girl reached the camp, they received a letter explaining the many activities they would be able to participate in. We have a copy of that letter.

“Girl Scouts: 

This is your camp! Whatever you would like most to do in living in your summer home is possible under the friendly guidance and help of your counselors. Excellent riding and swimming are two of the most popular sports. Hiking, cooking meals out, and singling by the campfire are precious parts of camping. As you grow older, you learn more and more real camping skills so that you may take that long overnight trip or manage all of your own campfire cooking.

Living in a unit with girls of your own age and grade, you have a wonderful opportunity to make and appreciate real friendships. You’ll probably have a chance to “Be in a play” or challenge your cabinmates to an Archery or deck tennis game. You can make puppets or create a useful article of clay or wood, or leather. You’ll have the chance to just sit and gaze or to walk long distances from the bluff across the lovely valley from your own wooded campsite in the Ozark foothills. Have you ever watched the stars or learned what they were? You’ll do that too.

Your parents are asked to cooperate with you and your camp director and counselors in making this summer’s Camp Scott experience the happiest, healthiest, and most adventurous you’ve ever had. We’ll be looking for you.”

This letter was to help ease the girls into the idea that they were going to be without their parents for the week. Not all of them were too keen on the idea of being dropped off into the woods. I remember when I was young, and I was sent off to camp. I absolutely hated it when I first got there, but over time I made new friends, and then I ended up having a great time. I think just getting through the first couple of days is the biggest hurdle for these camps. 

On the first day, three girls who didn’t really know each other received their tent assignments. Their names were Lori Farmer, who was eight years old, Michele Guse, who was 9 years old, and Doris Denise Milner, who was 10 years old. They were assigned to the last tent on the row of tents, furthest from the camp counselors tent. I believe that this would have been tent number 7. I also have read reports that it was tent number 8, but there were only 7 scout tents that I could see from the aerial pictures. The only other tent in the area was the counselor’s tent.   

 


On the first day of camp, it had begun to rain. It was right after dinner, and the girls were all in an area that they called the singing porch. They waited until the rain subsided some, and they all walked over to the Kiowa camp where their tents were. All of the girls got in their tents. There were 4 girls in a tent, except in tent number 7, which only had three at the time. The counselors then went tent to tent, telling the girls to change into dry clothes and shoes and get ready for bed. They then buttoned-down each of the tents so that the rain could not get in.  

The girls had all huddled into their tents. Most of the nighttime activities were canceled due to the weather, so most of the girls spent their time writing letters to their parents. Each girl in tent number seven wrote to their families, and we have a copy of each letter. 

Lori wrote. “Dear Mom and Dad and Misti and Jo and Chad and Kathy. Were just getting ready to go to bed. It’s 7:45. We’re at the beginning of a storm and having a lot of fun. I’ve met two new friends, Michele Guse and Denise Milner. I’m sharing a tent with them. It’s started raining on the way back from dinner. We’re sleeping on cots. I couldn’t wait to write. We’re all writing letter now ’cause there’s hardly anything else to do. With love, Lori.” 

Denise wrote. “Dear mom, I don’t like camp. It’s alfwl. The first day it rained. I have three new friends named Glenda, Lori and Michele. Michele and Lori are my roommates. Mom, I don’t want to stay at camp for two weeks. I have to come home and see Kassie and everybody. Your loving child, Denise Milner.” 

Michele wrote. “Dear Aunt Karen, How are you? I am fine. I am writing from camp. We can’t go outside because it is storming. Me and my tentmates are in the last tent in our unit. My tentmates are Denise Milner and Lori Farmer. My room is in shades of purple. Love Michele.”

The girls went all went to bed. A few times in the night, some campers remembered some of the girls laughing or talking loud, and they were told to go back to bed. Later in the night, around 3 am, some campers heard what they thought was a scream, but when they voiced their concerns, they were told it was nothing and to go back to bed.  

That following day, camp counselor Carla Wilhite was walking down a path towards the showers. She had a long full day scheduled with the Scouts, and she wanted to get her shower in before they all got up. As she walked along the path, she noticed something ahead. It looked as if it were sleeping bags. At first, she believed that they might have fallen off of a scout truck. It was the only thing that made sense at the time. But as she approached, she discovered the nude body of a little girl.  

Carla knew at an instant that the young girl was dead. Her eyes were open and unseeing. Carla ran back to the counselor’s tent and alerted everyone about the dead body, and they needed to do a headcount of the scouts. At the time, Carla was under the impression that an accident had happened on the trail. But that thought was quickly dashed away.

The Camp director Barbara Day and her husband, Richard, left with the camp ranger, Ben Woodward. Not far from where the little girl was found dead, they found two bloody sleeping bags, both containing a young girl zipped inside. Both girls were also dead. 

Barbara and Richard alerted authorities of the girl’s deaths and then began gathering and organizing the scout’s immediate return home. In a move that would follow Barbara for many years to come. Before calling and informing the parents of the murdered girls of what had happened, Barbara first called the camps insurance company. She probably feared what this would do to the almost 50-year-old camp, and rightfully so. Because this would be the last camp that Camp Scott would ever see.  

Highway patrol, Police, and FBI quickly took control of the crime scene. Tent number seven was thought to be the murder scene. There was a considerable amount of blood in the tent. The mattresses were completely soaked through with blood, and it had pooled on the floor.  

The tent contained a lot of evidence a red large battery flashlight was left behind, it was not one of the girl’s flashlights, and it didn’t belong to any of the counselors. So it was believed that the killer accidentally left it behind. The wooden platform itself had several bloody footprints on it. They were tennis shoes, and the type and style of the shoe made investigators believe they belonged to the killer and that it was a male. It looked as if the killer tried and quickly gave up on the idea of cleaning up the blood at the scene. The bedding had been stripped and ditched on the trail.  

The girls had been bound by two-inch wide electrical tape and lengths of ski rope. Most of this was already wet from the morning dew, so lifting fingerprints seemed impossible. 

That same morning, a local man had been arrested for public drunkenness. When he sobered up, they started interrogating him about his possible involvement in the killings. They held him for several days, checking out his story, and found that he could not have been involved.  

The girls had bloody fingerprints on them as well. Investigators didn’t know if it came from the killer or someone checking the girls when they first found on the trail. The girls were transported to the medical examiner’s office. It was believed right away, one of the girls had been sexually molested. But to everyone’s horror, during the autopsy, they found that each girl had been molested in some way. Two of the girls died of head trauma, the third died by strangulation. They believed that the two girls were hit with something heavy that could be wielded and struck with by quick blows.  

This was not only a shock to the state of Oklahoma. But it was a shock to the nation as well. This was early in the summer months, and many camps were taking place across the country. Camps from all over were hiring more security to help parents and campers feel safe. Many parents swore off letting their children ever go camping again, and many kids missed their camps in 1977.  

To help preserve the evidence and potentially find more evidence, Officials moved the wooded platform that the tent stood on. It was strategically flown to Oklahoma City at the OSBI headquarters. There, lab officials were able to study the footprints and preserve them.

One standard theory that didn’t and wouldn’t occur to me now is that it might have been a gay woman who committed the murders. I don’t know why anyone would jump to that theory so early in the case, but the only thing I could think of is that the prominent people being questioned at this time were the camp counselors, who were all female. There was only two male staff at the camp, and they didn’t seem to be involved in any way.  

Each of the counselors was interrogated at the scene and after. They were not allowed to return to their tents to gather their belongings until officers had a chance to search them first. A few days later, they again let the counselors back on the campgrounds to gather their belongings. Officers went with them, and they went through everything, piece by piece, and cataloged everything they had. One of the counselors was missing her glasses and an eyeglasses case.

Meanwhile, Officials were putting together one of the most extensive searches the state has ever seen. Every agency was pitching in, and they had hundreds of searchers looking for clues. A Pennsylvania State Trooper came down to Oklahoma with his search dogs. They were two sizeable German Shepherds, and they had helped with searches before. After a day or two of searching, they found one of the most significant pieces of evidence still missing. The murder weapon.  

It was a crowbar. There was a home robbery at a farm nearby, and one of the things taken was a heavy crowbar. This robbery happened near the same time as the murders. Officers believed that this was the heavy blunt object used to kill two of the girls. When officers linked the two crimes, they found that the homeowner also had rope and tape that was stolen, the same kinds used in the murders. 

Searchers found photographs that appeared to have been recently dropped in a cave that looked like it was being lived in. They were of three women, and after some searching, they were able to identify who they all were. But they didn’t know if it pertained to the case or not. But they became very interested in the cave when they found the stolen camp counselors eyeglasses and case in there as well.   

The Detectives on the case started to look at their suspect pool and decided that they needed to start eliminating the ones they knew had nothing to do with the case. But how do you do something like that? One tactic was to use a lie detector and see if everyone is telling the truth. This can be helpful in not only finding the killer but in finding anyone else who is holding back information that might be useful to the Police and the investigation. One by one, everyone close to the murders passed the polygraph tests. One by one, they were all taken off the suspect list.  

It appeared that the staff had nothing to do with the murders. Everyone else that they looked into that was in the area could prove their innocence as well.  

It wasn’t until June 23rd, just 11 days after the murders, that they started to hone in on a suspect, and they let it be known to the public. There was a convicted rapist who had escaped from jail in 1973 named Gene LeRoy Hart. He had been on the run ever since, and it was believed that he hid out in the area. He grew up there and knew the landscape well. They honed in on him after they found the photographs. The photos were taken by prison photographer Lewis Lindsey, who Hart worked for while in prison. These photos could have been stolen by Hart and then accidentally dropped by the suspect on the night of the murders. 

Even though Hart was not in custody, District Attorney Sid Wise brought him up on charges of murder. He believed that it would only be a matter of time before they found him because the manhunt had zeroed in on him, and they were not going to leave no stone left unturned.  

It was during this search they came upon a cave that had writing along the inside of it. Written on the walls was this chilling phrase “The killer was here. Bye Bye fools, 77-6-17.” 

Although the Detectives on the case believed that this would be a short manhunt. This search would go on for nearly a year. On April 6th, 1978, Gene Leroy Hart was located 50 miles from the murder scene. He was living with a Native American medicine man named Sam Pigeon Jr. Hart was of Native American descent, and it was believed that Pigeon harbored Hart because he thought him to be innocent and would not get a fair trial.  

Officers surrounded the little house where Hart was hiding. As they broke down the front door, Hart tried to escape out the back. Only to be met by Officers with loaded shotguns. Hart quickly surrendered and was taken into custody. They took Hart to McAlester prison in Oklahoma to hold him. They placed him on death row so that he would not have another opportunity to escape.  

At the trial, Hart pled innocent. The prosecution started the trial with the accounts by the counselors. Each one of them described the scene that day and what had happened. They identified the missing items as theirs and didn’t know how they got into the cave. They tugged on the Jury’s heartstrings by taking them to the camp and showing them where the three girls were placed and raped.  

The defense brought in the owner of the flashlight, who stated that he loaned it to two boys from Kansas. They argued that nothing the prosecution brought forward actually proved Hart’s guilt. And they could only convict Hart if they had no doubt of his innocence. They also produced another suspect, Bill Stevens. Stevens was a former inmate of a Kansas prison and was seen near the camp the week before the murders. He has been convicted of rape. The morning of the murders, witnesses reported seeing Stevens with boots on that were stained with something red.  

The defense also accused authorities of planting the evidence in the cave. They suggested that it was convenient that in a high profile crime like this one, those who had access to the belongings of the counselor’s items were to find the missing items days later in a place where their suspect was known to have been.  

The Jury received the case on October 30th, 1979, and on the next day, On Halloween. Gene Leroy Hart was found innocent. Everyone was shocked, including Hart, who immediately asked the judge if he could address the Jury and was denied.  

Interviews with jury members after the verdict gives us a look into their decision. They were mostly shocked that the prosecution had little to no evidence tieing Hart to the murders. It’s hard to convict someone on so little.  

The Girl Scout murders are considered an open case. The authorities believe that the murderer was Hart and have looked into little else. Over the years, several people were significantly affected by this case. Camp counselor Carla Wilhite reported in 1979 that she found it impossible to find another camp that would hire her. They would tell her that they didn’t want the negative press that would surely follow her. The owners of Camp Scott were also the subject in a civil suit brought on by the victims’ parents. Although the owners were not held liable for their deaths, the camp never recovered and has remained closed until this day.  

I’m not sold either way on this case. I would like to see the DNA testing come back on this one to see if Hart had anything to do with the murders or not. They did testing in 1989 when DNA testing was relatively new and again in 2002. Each time the DNA testing failed. But as time goes on, DNA testing improves, and I think it’s past time they try again.  

What do you all think? I hope you all enjoyed the show. If you did, make sure you support us by subscribing to the show. It helps us out more than you know. I’ll see you all next time. See ya.

Hello and welcome everyone to Okie Investigations. My name is Trevor Shelby. The Spooky times are here, and that means we are telling Haunted stories once again.

But seriously, thank you all for joining us for our 2021 Spookytime Episodes. It’s October, and I’m ready to tell a few more spooky stories from my home state and perhaps elsewhere.

Hello everyone, and welcome to Forgotten True Crime by Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “The Real Candy Man,” has a lot of cool stuff on it that I think you all will like.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Hello everyone, I hope you all are having a spooky weekend. This is our last 2021 Halloween episode, and it’s the one that I have wanted to cover for a real long time. Halloween is such an exceptional time for kids. It marks the first of many Holidays to quickly come. You get to dress up, run around town and get tons of free candy. But this story is about someone who took advantage of all of that, someone who decided to take everything unique for trick or treaters and stomp it out as if it were the perfect opportunity for murder.

Have you ever had your parents go through your candy before you are allowed to eat it? Did they check it for signs of tampering? My parents did, and it was because of this case that they feared that someone would be trying to drug or poison me. For my own kids, I always checked their candy, but it was because I was collecting the “Dad Tax” and getting my hard-earned 10% of the spoils.

Our story began on October 31st, 1974.

This Halloween was going to be special for 8-year-old Timothy O’Bryan. He was going to get to go trick or treating with his friends and his sister. The two families had planned an outing with their fathers, and they agreed to take them over to Pasadena, Texas, where they were told the best candy was passed out to kids in costume.

After school, Timothy waited for his father to get off of work. Both Timothy and his sister Elizabeth eagerly awaited his arrival. Dark clouds started moving in, and the sky got a little darker early that evening. When Ronald O’Bryan pulled into the driveway from work, he was greeted by both children in costume, ready for an evening of fun.

The first thing on their agenda was they had planned on going to the Bates residence. Jimmy Bates had prepared a dinner for the two families. Jimmy also had two eager children, ready to go trick or treating. When the O’Bryan’s arrived, the two families sat down to dinner together. Little did they know, for one of them, it would be their last meal.

As the two families wrapped up dinner and began to put away plates, the dark skies got darker, and it began to rain. This is not unusual for texas. Rain can move in, and then minutes later, it’ll sometimes clear up. But for one of the Bates children, it was too much. They decided to stay home for the night.

Because they didn’t know what the rain was going to be quite like, Ronald O’Bryan and Jimmy Bates decided to limit the trick or treating to two streets. They agreed that Citation Street and Donerail Street would be the best ones to go down.

Ronald and the kids would go to each door at each house, and Jimmy would wait at the sidewalk. As they went up Donerail street, they came upon house number 4112. The front porch lights were off, but the kids had gone up to knock on the door anyway. Ronald walked up to the kids, and the kids soon ran off when no one answered the door. Ronald stayed behind and then rejoined Jimmy at the sidewalk. Ronald was swinging five giant Pixy Styx tube candy in the air. He told Jimmy that the rich neighbors were handing out expensive treats.

They fished walking the two streets and then returned to the Bates home. There, Ronald handed out the giant candies to each of the children. A trick or treater came to the door at this moment, and it was a child that Jimmy knew from church. They also gave them one of the Pixy Styx tube candies.

The O’Bryan family then started on their way home. Their mother left to visit with a friend, so it was up to Ronald to get everyone in and ready for bed. It was getting late, and it was a school night. The kids were excited about their candy, so Ronald allowed them to pick one candy they could have before bedtime.

Timothy picked the large Pixy Styx as his choice. Ronald helped him open the candy, and Timothy lifted the tube to his mouth, but nothing would come out. He handed it back to his father, who rolled the tube in his hand to loosen the candy so it would come out easier. This time, Timothy got to eat some of the candy. But he immediately didn’t like it. He told his father that it tasted terrible.

So, Ronald grabbed a glass of kool-aid and let Timothy take a drink to get the flavor out of his mouth. Shortly after, Timothy began to get really sick. He started to throw up, and Ronald took him into the bathroom. As he did so, Timothy started to become unresponsive and began to go into convulsions.

Ronald quickly dialed 911, and an ambulance was to their house within minutes. They had been parked nearby, and this was considered an excellent response time. They got Timothy to the Southmore Hospital, but it was too late. By 10:40 pm, Timothy died for what was, for now, an unknown reason.

It didn’t take doctors long to figure out what had happened. From what Ronald could tell them, they knew it sounded like Timothy was somehow poisoned, and the likely source was the candy they received while trick or treating. The doctors examined Timothy’s stomach contents and found 16 milligrams of cyanide. His blood had absorbed .4 milligrams. A fatal dose is .2 and .3 milligrams.

While at the hospital, Ronald also got sick on two occasions but refused to be examined. He did tell them that they got the candy in Pasadena, Texas, where the Bates family lived.

The police response was swift here. They gathered up all the known candy from the O’Bryan home and the Bates home. They also got the candy from the trick or treater who came by and was also given a giant Pixy Styx. All of these were handed over to Dr. Jachimczyk, who was a medical examiner. The doctor tested Timothy’s candy, and there were no traces of the poison, but it was missing the amount already eaten. He then tested the first few inches of the other tubes, and each of them contained a fatal dose of cyanide.

The police again made a quick response. Police Lt. Goad asked that all families that trick or treated on Citation Street and Donerail Street turn in their candy to the police station.

This would be hard for me to do as a kid. At 8 years old, I would have been devastated to turn in all of my candy. I really hope all of the kids that did get a special candy reward for doing so.

On November 1st, the day after Timothy’s murder, Ronald had his first meeting with the funeral director. Ronald informed him that he would need copies of the death certificate to give to the insurance agency, one for each policy. When asked how many did he need, Ronald said, “I need six copies.”

The shock of the residents of Citation and Donerail Street was intense. This was a tight-knit community, the kind of place where everyone knew each other. Many of the residents refused to believe that one of their own was capable of doing something so horrible. But as the days went on, each of them cooperated with police when they came knocking on their doors to ask questions.

Many detectives worked around the clock on this case, and many were working on their days off. They had mapped the two streets and made a plan to interview everyone they could to find a break in the case. Detective Turnipseed and Police Captian Rhodes were convinced that the person who handed out the candy lived on these streets.

Ronald also helped with this effort. It took him a while to figure it out. He still appeared very grief-stricken, but in the end, he located the house that gave him the candy. Ronald stated that a man who lived there handed out the candy by opening the door slightly and then handing him the 5 large tubes. He only knew it was a man because the arm was very hairy. So now the police had a suspect to look into.

But, it wouldn’t be long before a concerning phone call would alert police to another suspect.

The life insurance agency had received the death certificates for Timothy. An agent there decided to call the police and let them know about the policies and how they found them suspicious.

You see, Ronald began opening them months ago. Each time he opened another, the life insurance agency would protest and tell Ronald that they were well covered and he was only wasting his money. But he would demand that they allow him the extra policy’s and they would eventually let him open another.

To detectives, this was a major red flag. The second thing that alerted police to suspicious activity was finding no one on those two streets who were handing out expensive candy-like giant Pixy Styx’s. Days after the incident, it was only those 5 handed out by Ronald that were ever found.

Going along with this new suspect in the case, Detectives questioned Jimmy Bates, who was with Ronald. They didn’t know if he was involved in this as well. Jimmy turned out to be very cooperative with the police. He told them that when Ronald came up with the Pixy Styx’s, he never saw anyone open the door. Jimmy thought it was odd at the time, but he was also watching the kids run to the next house. He also told the police that Ronald was putting on a show in public by acting sad, but in private, he had been planning on going on trips with the life insurance money.

Police also started looking into the mysterious man who lived at house 4112. They found that the man who lived there was actually pretty well known. He was an air traffic controller, and he had been working on Halloween. He didn’t get off of work until after 10 pm and was not at his house. Many people who he worked with also confirmed his story.

The police got a search warrant for Ronald O’Bryan’s home. When they served the warrant, they were able to find a pair of scissors and a knife that had what they believed to be Pixy Styx candy on it and residue from the waxy plastic container. They took this to their lab who ran tests on the evidence they found, but they were inconclusive.

Police believed they had what they needed at this time to make an arrest. On November 5th, just days after his son’s passing, Ronald O’Bryan was charged with the murder of Timothy O’Bryan. This was a massive shock to the community. The residents in Pasadena were somewhat relieved, knowing that the killer wasn’t one of their neighbors.

Ronald’s wife denied knowing anything about her husband’s plans. There was no evidence that she had a hand in any part of it. It was thought that Ronald believed that he could trick her, and she would believe anything he said, but she ended up being a much more intelligent woman than that, and at the Trial for Ronald, she testified against him. He never told her about the life insurance policies. This is something that you would share with your spouse.

During the trial, we found out that Ronald had openly talked to others about how to obtain cyanide and its effects. He even went as far as trying to purchase some, but they only sold it by the pound, and he didn’t need that much.

With all of the evidence presented against him, Ronald still proclaimed his innocence.

When the jury received the case, they came back with a verdict within 46 minutes. They found Ronald O’Bryan guilty of murder. Ronald was sentenced to death.

Ronald would sit on Death Row until 1984. On March 31st, Ronald was led into the death chamber. He would die by lethal injection. Ronald’s last words were to state that the death penalty was wrong and that he forgave everyone who had a hand in his death.

They began to give him the lethal drugs at 12:38 am, and he was pronounced dead at 12:48 am.

I hope you all enjoyed the story, if you did, make sure you subscribe, so when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Being a subscriber is a way to support the show in many ways. The providers like apple and Spotify see that you have subscribed, and they help us out with searchability and other things. So thank you for helping us out!

You all have a wonderful week, see ya!

Hello everyone, and welcome to Okie Investigations, the True Crime Podcast where we tell the stories of crimes that happened long ago. If you are a true crime fan, make sure you subscribe to the podcast. That way, when we have new episodes, you will be the first to know. Also, check us out on our Facebook page Okie Investigations and visit our blog TrueCrime.Blog where we post a lot of the cool things we found for each episode. This episode, “Three is a Crowd,” has a lot of newspaper clippings dating back to 1891. They are so cool to dig through and take a deeper dive into this story.

Parts of this story may contain opinions and speculations and should be taken as such. These stories depict violent crimes of all types and may be a trigger for some listeners. Listener discretion is advised.

Next week November 1st through the 6th, I will be on vacation. My feet will be on a sandy beach somewhere in Belize. If you are out that way, I’m the guy who’s probably sunburnt and has had too many Mojitos. What does this mean for all of you? Well, nothing really. I have preplanned an episode drop and a bonus episode so that it will be business as usual.

We do have some cool things coming down the pipeline that are not entirely ready to announce just yet. We have been working hard to bring you all the best True Crime content that we possibly can and will continue to do so because this is what I love to do.

Today’s story comes from doing a lot of research on late 1800’s crimes. These are sometimes harder to research due to their age. Documents weren’t kept or were lost, and digging this one out was quite fun.

Our story first takes place in the town of Salem, Virginia, on April 4th, 1891.

A young African American woman, Susan Watkins, arrives in town. She was seen going from shop to shop, person to person, looking for anyone who knew her husband Charles Watkins, who she described as “Mulatto” due to his caucasian and African American parentage, or if they knew his friend, Benjamin Wright. As she does this, word begins to spread across town about the woman’s search. Someone who knows the second man, Benjamin, goes to his house and lets him know about the woman. He is told that the woman is in town and where to find her.

As soon as Benjamin arrives in town, he has no trouble finding the woman. She is still there, asking anyone who would listen if they knew the two men. So Benjamin approached the young woman and asked her why she was asking for him.

The woman introduces herself as Susan Watkins. She tells him that she is the wife of Charles Watkins. He left her some months ago, and she believed that he had run off with another woman. Benjamin refuses to believe this story. He explains that Charles had introduced him to his wife. She was a pretty white woman named Edith. But as he said this, Susan reached into the bag she was carrying and handed him a paper. It was a marriage certificate for Susan and Charles Watkins, both parties had signed it, and she intended to do what she could to save her marriage.

Susan explains that they used to live in Chicago, where Charles met the woman Edith Friebel. She was a german woman who fell in love with her husband. While Susan was working hard and trying to make ends meet, Charles and Edith were sneaking around and planning on running off together. Susan wanted the chance to confront them both and hopefully, get Edith to back down and go away.

This strikes a chord with Benjamin. He went into this expecting to find a mad lady looking for him, and now he finds this woman in need. Benjamin knew that Charles was not the most honest man, but he didn’t realize that he was as bad as this woman tells it. So he decided on the spot that he was going to help Susan confront Charles. He will also be by her side to face his friend who has been lying to him and everyone around him for too long.

Benjamin explained to Susan that he knew what town Charles was living in, but it was too late to go there now. They would leave at first light the next day, and they would definitely find her husband. Although he didn’t know where Charles was currently staying, he was confident that they would soon find out. They both went to Benjamin’s house, and he let Susan stay the night. That next day, they started off toward a town named Roanoke.

When they arrived in Roanoke, they went to a village that was a prominent African American community that is very tightknit. They began asking if anyone knew where Charles or Erith were staying. They also told the townsfolk about Charles leaving his wife for the other woman. Some of them were shocked. Benjamin had been introducing everyone to Edith and presenting her as his wife. None of them had any clue that it was all a ruse. Soon they were directed up the road to a house where George Washington lived…. no, not that George Washington.

When they arrived at the home, they knocked on the door, and the man who owned the house, George, answered. Susan and Benjamin introduced themselves and asked him if Charles was there. Fearing that something was up, George was reluctant to tell them one way or another. So Susan explained what was going on and showed him the marriage certificate.

Very confused, George lets them into the home where Charles and Edith are in the back, listening to everything. Everyone confronts Charles about what the truth actually is. At first, he denies knowing Susan, but no one believes him. Then he confesses what he had done. He explained that when he was with Susan, he didn’t mean to, but he fell in love with Edith. Knowing that Dudan would never accept a divorce, he decided to leave with Edith and disappear from Susan forever.

Charles explained that although he and Edith were not married, and at this time, since they were an interracial couple, it would be near impossible for them to be. They decided to just live as a married couple. Susan had little to nothing to say about all of this. In either story, she is somewhat the villain, going after a married man.

Seeing Ediths obvious discomfort, Charles decided to take her away from all of this and promised to come back and talk further to Susan. A light rain had come in as Charles and Edith left the Washington home. As the day went on, Susan and Mrs. Washington spoke some and got to know one another. George spent some time putting together several sleeping arrangements for everyone, knowing they were all probably in for a long night.

That late evening, Charles returned without Edith. He explained that he had taken her to his grandmother’s house in the mountains. Charles expressed that he wanted to talk to Susan alone, he had arranged a buggy ride for the two of them, but Susan quickly declined. Charles backed off of this idea for now.

They both spent the night together, having awkward conversations and not coming to any agreements. They were both just too stubborn to let the other one win.

That following day, Charles again asked if Susan wanted to go out with him. He had some things to take care of and said they could spend the time talking. But she again refused to leave the Washington home. Charles, who was visibly annoyed at this, left just after asking.

On this day, Susan confided in Mrs. Washington that she was scared to leave with Charles. She was suspicious of his behavior and didn’t trust him. Charles returned that evening at about 6PM. This time he demanded that Susan come with him. He explained that they were not going to be able to work anything out unless they could have some alone time together.

Susan must have given up at this point. Probably hoping that there was still a chance to save her marriage. So she gathered her things and went out with Charles just after 6PM.

Susan never returned to Washington’s home.

The next day, a young boy named Lawrence Anderson was out working with his friends. They were pulling an OX cart around town and gathering firewood, and loading it into the cart. Another boy that he was friends with had just come from the creek. He was frightened at something he had seen there. When Lawrence asked what it was, his friend told him it looked like a dead body near the log crossing in the creek. Lawrence knew of the log crossing. It was a large log placed over the stream some time ago. The bark had been stripped away from the log. On rainy days like this one, it was easy to slip while trying to cross the log.

The young boy ran down to the creek with his friend. When they reached the log, it was pretty clear that someone was in the water below. The woman was partially adrift. Her head was in the water, and her legs were up on an embankment. After discovering this, Lawrence ran down and alerted authorities to what they found.

Quickly police arrived, and they sent for someone to get the medical examiner. At first, it appeared that the woman had slipped and possibly hit her head and fell into the water. But as they looked further, the damage to her head seemed severe. When the medical examiner arrived, he agreed that something was not right with this. It appeared that she had been hit with something, not from a fall. They would have to do an autopsy to make sure.

No one recognized the woman. They believed that she must be new in town or was visiting. They started to ask the locals if they had seen a young woman in town, and they were told the story of Susan Watkins. How she was looking for her husband Charles and that he had been living with another woman at George Washington’s house. Believing this to being the same woman, they went to find Charles Watkins and his mistress Edith.

Officers first went to the place where Susan was known to have been. If she were here, they would be able to rule her out as the possible ID of the victim. They were heading to the home of George Washington.

When officers arrived, they were able to speak to both Mr. and Mrs. Washington. They explained why they were there and what was going on. They asked if Susan was at their home still. George told the officers that she had left the evening before with Charles and never came back. He also told the officers that Charles had recently taken Edith to his mother’s house. If he was anywhere, it was likely there. But Charles did return earlier that day for his trunk he left at the Washington home.

The authorities knew where Charles’s grandmother stayed. The only problem was that it would take a while to get there. She lived in the mountains in a wooded area.

As the officers were heading to Charles’s grandmother’s house, the medical examiner had removed the woman from the creekbed. They found that whatever happened, it wasn’t robbery. The woman had several pieces of jewelry on at the time of her death. Several gold rings, one with a diamond, a nice watch, and other jewelry. If there were a robbery, those would have been taken.

That evening, Officers arrived at the home of Charles’s grandmother. They were met by Lucy Watkins and Tayior Watkins, who were related and lived with the grandmother. They explained how Charles had shown up with Edith and left her there to stay. He went to talk with Susan and came back the next day. The night before, Charles seemed on edge, and he and Edith left that afternoon. They mentioned that Edith had been with them for the past couple of days, and she didn’t leave the house until this morning.

At a dead-end, the officers waited until the following day to resume the search for Charles and Edith. Salem officers were checking with the train stations to see if anyone matched the description for either person. They believed that someone who looked like Charles had purchased a ticket for one train, but no one remembered seeing him on it.

But they did get the break that they were looking for. Edith was spotted in town, just leaving George Washington’s home. She had returned to pick up some of her things. When officers arrived, she was just leaving their home. Officers arrested her on the spot and brought her in for questioning.

A corners jury had also been assembled to study the death of Susan Watkins. Some of the locals had identified her from seeing and talking to her earlier in the week. As they were examining Susan, Edith was confessing what she knew of the situation. She told officers that she had nothing to do with Susan’s death and that Charles wanted her to leave town with him and join him in the village of Liberty.

This information was passed to the corners jury, who came to this conclusion.

“The Jury believes that Susie Watkins came to her death between the hour of 8PM on the night of the 6th of April and the hour of 12 noon on the 7th of April, from wounds on the top of her head and a fracture of the skull inflicted by a rock, stick or some other hard instrument in the hands of Charles Watkins, and that Edith Fribel was an accessory to the act either before or after.”

The search was now on for Charles Watkins. The news of Susan’s murder was front-page news. The police were not the only ones who were looking for Charles. An angry mob had formed, comprised primarily of African American men who were mad that one of their friends could do something horrible. Their numbers swelled in the hundreds, and they vowed to lynch Charles for his crimes. The mob surrounded the jail when a rumor travels around that Charles had been caught. But the Sherrif had reassured them that it was false, and they soon dispersed after.

The authorities knew that they had to get to Charles before anyone else did if they wanted a chance to convict Charles for his crimes. A mob would surely kill him if they found him first.

Weeks would go by with no new news in the case. Officers were searching the mountainside and neighboring towns to see if he had been seen there. But it was like he had just vanished. During this time, the authorities believed that there would not be any way to convict Edith. So they cut a deal and let her go. Edith was very suspicious of this. When she left the prison, she was hounded by a reporter and some locals. The reporter kept asking what she was doing and where she was going. The local was giving her a piece of her mind.

Edith was followed all the way to the local train station, where she was able to buy a ticket to get out of town. She did tell the reporter that she believed that she was being followed by the police. She thought that they were watching her because she might know where Charles was. But she said that the joke was on them because she was going to her mother’s.

It would be months later before there was a break in the case. Close friends and family of Charles suddenly started getting letters from someone who went by the name of S. G. Williams. In the letters, the author confessed to Sarah’s murder and how he was working hard to get out of the country. The author let on that he was actually Charles and that he was working on lining up a job on a boat to go overseas. It would be a one-way trip for him. But for now, he found a hotel to work at to make ends meet.

But for Watkins, the devel was in the details, and it was ascertained that Charles was currently in North Carolina. One letter was sent to George Washington, who immediately turned it over to the police.

Detectives called the Detectives in Wilmington, North Carolina, to let them know to be on the lookout for Charles. They sent them a copy of the letter and gave them a physical description of Charles.

In North Carolina, it was Officer Ben Turlington who made the big break. He was going from hotel to hotel and checking to see if he could spot Charles. He then went to the Island Beach Hotel, and that’s where he asked if Mr. Williams was working there. He was told that he did. He was their head waiter. Williams came out to see who was asking for him, and he was arrested on the spot. Officer Turlington knew it was Charles from the description he was given.

Charles was quickly brought back to Virginia. The mob that had gathered before that wanted to lynch Charles had since settled down and waited for the justice system. Many didn’t believe that Charles would get a fair trial in court, but they also didn’t think he was innocent.

It wasn’t until the trial that we saw a clearer picture of what happened when Sarah died. The trial started on November 17th, 1891. After getting a Jury into place, they were able to start the trial. The first person they introduced as a witness was young Lawrence Anderson. He described the scene as he found it and stated that they never went down to the water to see the body. They stayed up on the bank and immediately went to tell someone.

The next witness was John Banks. He was one of the men who went down and viewed the body. He discovered tracks of what looked like a new shoe leaving the scene and heading into the mountains. He had followed the trail of footprints until it went cold.

They then called on members of the corners jury to testify on their findings and their take on the case. Each one had not only examined the body in some way, but they had also visited the site of the murder to see what conditions they were in.

Then a more profound account of what happened started to be told. On the evening of the murder, Taylor Watkins testified that he is Charles’s uncle. He said that Charles came into his home and started talking about Susan and how she was now threatening to shoot him and Edith. It was soon after this, Taylor noticed someone coming up to their home. They looked like they were injured. When he opened his door, a woman pushed her way in. It was Susan. She started yelling at Charles and asked why he shot her . Charles denied shooting her. Susan’s hand had been injured, and she was asking that Charles take the ball out of her hand so she could then leave. Susan said that Charles could have his white wench.

They all stayed the night at Taylor’s, and that morning, Susan demanded that Charles take her to a doctor to remove the ball from her hand. Then she will leave town. Susan and Charles left that morning for town. A few hours later, he feared something else might have happened when news came of the dead woman found at the creek.

When the Jury received the case. They quickly returned with the verdict and found Charles Watkins, Guilty. The judge ordered that in January that next year, Charles would be hanged.

After the trial, Charles seemed to have a mental break. He started acting odd, and he focused intently on religion. The guards began describing Charles as a raving lunatic due to his behavior. The court had to address it. Many thought he would be declared insane, and they would vacate his sentence and send him to a mental institution. But just the opposite happened. He was found sane, and the sentence was allowed to resume.

On January 8th, 1892, Charles walked to the gallows that were built for him. Earlier that day, he had confessed to the crime he had committed. He gave a detailed account to clear his mind some. He was still acting very odd at this time. He was very focused on religion and would often talk to himself.

When he reached the top of the gallows, he was asked if he had anything he wanted to say. Charles just shook his head. They then placed a black cloth sack over his head and fastened the noose around his neck. Charles fell several feet when the trapdoor was sprung, but the rope failed to break his neck. It took 8 minutes for Charles to die.

The one thing about this case that I wonder is, did Edith have more to do with the murder than suggested? I could not find much on her whereabouts during all of this, and it’s interesting that she fled so quickly after she was released. What do you think?

If you want to find out more on this case, visit truecrime.blog to read all of the incredible newspaper clipping we have on it. If you enjoyed this story, please give us a review. They help us out so much.

I’ll see you all next time. See ya.

Good morning, good evening, good afternoon, whenever you are listening, welcome to the show. Today, we will uncover a shocking story that took place roughly 112 years ago in Brownsville, New York. The criminal justice system was a lot less complicated back then. This was not always a good thing. As this story unfolds, you may start to learn why there are so many checks and balances in the system today. Our current Criminal Justice methods are far from perfect, which is why there is so much room for reform, but we must also look to the past and see where things didn’t always work or go to plan.

So to our story.

On April 23rd, 1908, Patrick Brennan was headed home from a long day of working at the Remington Mill. He was sore, tired, and ready to be home. As he walked up to his home, he reached above the front door for where they kept a spare key. But it was missing. This was not totally unexpected. You see, Patrick and his wife Sarah had been fighting for quite some time now. This was not the first time he found it hard to get into his own home.

Luckily, he kept another spare key in the shed outback. If Sarah had forgotten that one, he would be able to get in the house. As he walked out back, Partick noticed his neighbor James Farmer watching him. Patrick waved, but James didn’t return the wave. Not really caring, Patrick entered the shed and lifted the old box to hide his key. It, too, was missing.

Patrick just shook his head and again returned to the front door. He knocked and knocked, but no one would answer. Now, having gone through this before. Patrick decided that he would get into the house the one way that he knew would work. They had a window upstairs with a broken latch, and there was no way to secure it. So, Patrick again returned to his shed and then pulled out his ladder. As he did so, he again noticed his neighbor James. This time, James was walking up the walkway and was just a few feet away.

This was also not wholly unexpected. The Farmers were good friends of Patrick and Sarah’s. They had become close since the Farmed moved into the run-down house next door. If there was trouble at the home, Sarah probably told the Farmers about it.


The two greeted one another, and James told Patrick that Sarah had left town to stay with relatives. Patrick knew that things were terrible between them, but not this bad. Then James told Patrick something that it looked like he was almost afraid to say to him. He said that some months back, Sarah and his wife Mary Farmer had worked out a deal on the sale of the house. The deed had been transferred, and the agreement was now complete. Patrick was now homeless.

After recovering from the shock of being told that not only has your wife left you, but she also sold the house from out of under you, Patrick then started to question things. He asked why did everyone wait to tell him this? Why didn’t his wife or even James himself talk to him about this? He started to question if any of this was even real. James told Patrick that everything was on the up and up, and if he wanted to review the deed transfer, he could see it at the county office.

Patrick was then asked to leave the property. Grudgingly, he did so. Patrick decided to stay at the local Inn while he cleared his head and figured out what to do next. The first thing he started doing was writing to all of Sarah’s relatives who might know where she was staying. Over the next few days, he returned to his old home to ask the Farmers if they knew where his wife might have gone. Each time he returned, James and Mary would give him a slightly different story. Each time, it made it sound harder and harder to find his wife. They finally told him that Sarah had told them that she was moving to Canada and that Patrick would never see her again.

The next day Patrick was served with an eviction notice that required him to stay away from home. It was clear that the Farmers were done with all of Patrick’s questioning. So at the advice of a friend, Patrick sought out a lawyer in town who might help him with his troubles. He spoke with Attorney Floyd Carlisle. Now, one of the areas that Mr. Carlisle’s specialized in was home and property law. So the first thing he did was get an accurate description of Sarah Brennan, and then he went down to the county records office and looked at the deed transfer of the property. Everything was in order. It looked like Sarah had used another attorney in town, Mr. Burns, and they had transferred the deed into the Farmer’s names. Back then, when a deed was transferred, they would note down the description of the person who came in to do so. Very little was put down about Sarah, but what was written down didn’t resemble Sarah at all.

So at once, Attorney Carlisle went to the Inn where Patrick had been staying. He showed Patrick a copy of the transfer and asked about the description, and Patrick said that it wasn’t his wife, but it sounded more like it resembled Mrs. Farmer. Then, they both started to put together some of the pieces that fit together. Although Patrick and his wife had been fighting, this was nothing new, and they would have moved on from their problems. They loved one another, and after 25 years of marriage, they had no secrets. This is why it was hard to believe that Sarah could or would keep the idea of selling the home a secret, just to take the money and run. They loved their home and planned on staying there for the rest of their days. None of the stories that the Farmers had told him so far made any sense, and it seemed like they were hiding something.

This was also what Attorney Carlisle believed as well. But he also feared that something awful had happened to Sarah, something that Patrick had not yet come to consider.

They both decided to speak to the county attorney, Mr. Pitcher, to see what they could do. After reciting what had happened so far, they set a meeting that soon involved the police as well. They all decided that on the next day, they would all meet at the Farmers residence, formally Patrick’s home, and then the police would conduct a search to see if there was anything out of place that might explain the disappearance of Sarah Brennan.

The next day, everyone arrived at the same time at the Farmer’s new home. The police knocked on the door to find both James and Mary in the house, moving in. The police let them know that they were there to make a search of the home. James didn’t seem to mind, but Mary seemed nervous. Room by room, each area was searched. The one thing that they noted down that was odd was that all of Sarah’s belongings were still in the home. Her dresses, clothing, and luggage were all where she kept them. If she were leaving, she would have taken them with her.

Besides that, they didn’t find anything else. Upstairs one of the officers asked for help. He had found a trunk in one of the back rooms that was used for storage. It had an odd smell and was locked. When asked for the key, the Farmers stated that they had lost it long ago. The officer then went out and retrieved an ax. When he returned, he immediately began breaking into the trunk. As he did so, a horrible smell filled the room. When the lid was opened, they found Mrs. Sarah Brennan, chopped up and squeezed into the trunk.

Right away, James Brennan denied knowing what was in the trunk. He then looked to Mary, who looked panicked stricken, and she began to blame James for the murder, but almost as soon as she said it, she regretted it and then confessed that she had been plotting this all along and that her husband didn’t know of the murder.

Both Mary and James were arrested on the spot and brought to jail. James kept quiet and refused to answer any questions. He acted as if he didn’t know what had happened, and he was afraid to say anything. However, Mary had a lot to say. She immediately confessed to what had happened and why she killed Sarah. Mary told the officers that they had lived next to one another for years and that over the last few months, she started coming up with a plan on how to steal their neighbor’s house. One day when both of the Brennan’s were out of their home, Mary and creped into their home by using one of the extra keys that she knew they hid. She rummaged through the house and found the deed within minutes. She then pretended to be Sarah and went to an attorney who didn’t know either of them to make the transfer.

Then she waited several months to make sure that the transfer wasn’t contested. But this is where her plan went a little sideways. How do you evict someone who thinks that they own their own home? Once they find out that the deed was transferred, they could just as easily report her and have her arrested. So, When Mary saw that Mr. and Mrs. Brennan were fighting, she decided to hatch another plan. If she could get rid of Sarah, she could claim that the house was bought and Sarah left her husband. She then went to the Brennan home, killed Sarah, cut her up, and placed her in the trunk.

The body of Mrs. Sarah Brennan was sent to the county coroner, and they immediately began to assemble a coroner jury to see what had happened to Sarah.

Now, if you are a first-time listener and you don’t know what a Corners Jury is, don’t worry. We got you on that one. This is a special Jury of medical professionals that served their local area with these types of cases. They would all help with the autopsy, and they would each come to their own conclusion on what happened and how the person died. This was a way to make sure that not one doctor was siding with either side in this case and that their findings would be 100% unbiased. Much like a regular jury, sometimes the corners jury would go as far as to come to a verdict that not only listed how the person died but who was responsible. They had access to all of the evidence and knew of the facts in the case. So, in this case, they found that Mary Farmer had struck Sarah Brennan on the head with an ax. This instantly killed Sarah, and she likely didn’t feel much pain.

They handed this information over to the authorities to decide if they would indict the Farmers for murder or not. Taking this information, the County Attorney had no trouble indicting both James and Mary for the murder of Sarah Brennan.

As with many of the cases at the time, the trial for Mary Farmer began quickly. On June 10th, 1908, Mary Farmer’s defense was that she was insane. The state had her examined, and they found her fit to stand trial, but that didn’t stop them from bringing in several people from Mary’s past to talk about how she was and how the person they knew wouldn’t have killed anyone. A former employer provided unhelpful testimony. They thought that they would state that Mary was an average person and would also say that they couldn’t believe that she would have killed someone, but instead, they just said that they were a good employee, and that was about it. They didn’t know her personally.

James’s sister testified that she was given the deed to file with the county. She knew that it was Mary’s signature on the form and not Sarah’s when she looked at it. But she decided not to say anything about it at the time. On the day of the murder, her Brother James was helping her at her home, and that’s when Mary came over and told James that he had to tell Patrick today that he was no longer the owner of his home and that his wife had left him.

After 10 days of trial, the Jury received the case. They spent three hours deliberating and came back with a verdict. Guilty. They affixed death as the sentence.

At this point in history, Mary Farmer was scheduled to be the second woman to be put to death by an electric chair in the state of New York.

Now, James Farmer’s trial was a little different. He claimed he knew nothing about the murder, he believed his wife had done it, but he had no hand in it. He wasn’t going to claim that he was insane or anything like that. Instead, he would try and prove that he wasn’t present at the time of the murder.

Ont the day of the murder, James went to a friend’s house who lived on the other side of them. His name was Doran. Doran and James planned on working on a cement walkway that morning. Doran testified that James arrived 20 minutes before 9. Its thought that the murder was committed around 9:30 that morning. So, if James was with Dorian, there was no way he had an active hand in the murder.

The state, however, brought witnesses forward that directly contradicted Doran’s statements. Several witnesses claimed that they saw James return home several times that day. They also questioned how James could not have known at all that something was up? Even if Mary came up with a reasonable excuse on how she got the money to buy the home, how did he not think it odd that Mary would up and leave a 25-year marriage with no prior warning?


Just like in Mary’s case, the Jury received the case and deliberated for three hours. James was found guilty of murder and was given the death sentence.

Mary immediately appealed her case and also asked the governor to step in and reduce her sentence to life in prison. But each time, her pleas fell on deaf ears. She had to be given a special cell on death row. She had to be out of ear and eyeshot of the male prisoners. She was attended to by special female staff, and James was housed at a separate prison so they could not see one another.

Mary’s execution date was set for March 29th, 1909. Her attorney made a special appointment with the governor to reaccess the case and perhaps give Mary life in prison instead. When he arrived at the meeting, the attorney had brought several people who knew Mrs. Farmer was a good person, and they all tried to convince him to give her this. He told them he would think about it, but as the Marth 29th date grew near, he announced that he would not step in.

On March 29th, The day of the execution, Mary was permitted some time she could spend with her husband. It was said by the priest who attended the meeting that the two were at first standoffish at first, but they soon were able to talk to one another and give their goodbyes. It was there that Mary Farmer gave the priest a note which was a full confession to the crime.

Mary Farmer walked into the death chamber, head shaved and ready for the end. She gave her last words to the crowd to the thoughts to her husband, and how it made her sad to see him on death row because he had nothing to do with the murder, it was all her.


She then sat in the chair, and they began strapping her down and attaching the electrodes. At 6:05PM, they flipped the switch for one minute. 1840 volts of electricity were applied. When they stopped, Mary let out a small whimper and a moan. The doctors found her to still be alive. They then began the electrocute her again for a few seconds and promptly stopped. The doctors checked and again found her to be alive. They again flipped the switch and electrocuted her. This time, she died.

After the execution, the prison doctor told the crowd that Mary was dead after the first shock, but many didn’t believe this, having seen the actions first hand.

Remember, James had been moved to the same Death Row as his wife. He knew the exact moment they were killing her. During this time, it was said that James spent the entire time praying for his wife and her soul.

Even though Mary was seen as a killer and someone who was not to be trusted, her last words carried a lot of weight. James successfully appealed his sentence and was awarded a new trial. This time around, things seemed a little different, and they were able to use the confession of Mary as proof that James had nothing to do with the actual murder.

The Jury responded to this new evidence and found James Not guilty of Sarah’s murder.

It’s hard for me to say one way or the other what I believe happened for real in this case. The biggest question is, did James have a hand in Sarah’s murder? I have to believe that he had to suspect something was going on. When the deed was transferred, how could he just accept that his wife made a purchase of that size with magical money from a long-lost relative? Or the disappearance of Sarah? It’s just hard for me to believe that he had nothing to do with any of it. It must have been hard for Patrick to see James walk out a free man.

Specters on the Trail is long lost ghost story about a young cowboy who sees ghostly apparitions while on the trail. Originally published in 1890 and has not been published since, we bring this story back for another ghostly episode. 

In the summer of 1873, I was thirty years of age – in perfect health and of steady nerve. I was no believer in the uncanny – hardly in the supernatural – and had always pooh-poohed at tales of ghosts, phantoms, and visions of all sorts. But at the time mentioned above, the experience I am about to relate put my intellect and sensibility to test in such a manner as to make me sparing thenceforward of ridicule and formed me to find a place in credence for the possibility of apparitions.

It is unnecessary to explain how I came to be traveling in the Far Wast without companions, except for horse, and dog, and gun. Following the general route of the old overland trail, I camped one night in the edge of a considerable forest and at a point from which I could look forth over a broad, open plain.

It was already after sundown. The good horse was picketed, and having provided a supper for myself and the dog from a rabbit which my gun had brought down an hour or two earlier, I disposed things for the night, and, as the stars came out, lay down to sleep, comfortably rolled in a blanket.

It was probably in the small hour of the night that I awoke and rose to a sitting posture. The moon was climbing in the eastern sky, with not a feather of cloud in the course, and every object stood forth as clearly as in the day.

But it was not for me to contemplate in quietude the rare beauty of the night. In almost the first moment of consciousness, my eyes foil upon a slowly moving object in the distance. It was one of those canvas-covered wagons, the “prairie schooners” so familiar in the early days of overland travel to California.

It was approaching almost directly toward me, and my curiosity was at once aroused. Why anyone should be traveling thus, and so late at night, I could not imagine. The movement was heavy as if the horses were jaded, and the man who walked by their side had a weary step.

Twenty minutes passed, the vehicle approaching nearer and nearer. Still on it came, until when about thirty yards from me, it suddenly stopped, and the man looking abut seemed to be considering the wisdom of making camp.

At this moment, I suddenly realized that the approach of the wagon had been utterly noiseless. Not a chuck of the wheels, not the sound of a step, either of horse or man. And, furthermore, there was no indication that I had been discovered, although I should have been as visible to this man as he to me. What could this mean? I was dreaming? No, I was never more awake. Was this a hallucination? No, for the dog, who had been aroused by my movement in awaking, now turned his head in the direction of the new arrival and uttered a low growl. I laid my hand on him to keep him quiet.

The man now stood by the forward wheel, looking in at the opening of the canvas top, and though I heard no voice, I imagined that he was speaking to someone within. A woman’s head appeared, and after a glance around gave a nod of assent, and the man proceeded to unharness the horses and turn them loose to graze. Then after a moment, in which he seemed to be anxiously surveying the trail over which they had come, he helped the women to alight.

And now, their movement greatly puzzled me. Walking to and fro, they seemed to be searching for some particular spot of ground. As I said above, I had selected my camping ground on the outer edge of the forest. They were moving about, therefore amid mingled shadows and moonbeams, but every motion was visible. Finally, the woman pointed to a space between two young trees, and the man, after looking at it for a moment, went to the rear end of the wagon and brought forth a spade. With the edge of this implement, he marked off a rectangular space about five feet by two and began to dig. All this, let it be remembered, was in absolute silence. Here were apparently living beings, actively engaged and not more than a hundred feet away, and yet no sound was borne to me on the quiet air.

By this time, my curiosity had turned to marvel. Here was a contradiction of common sense! I could not believe that what I saw was real; these beings must be apparitions. And yet here by my side was the dog, as alert as I and trembling with an impulse to investigate, while obedient to my hand to restraint.

The digging proceeded, and the soil being soft five feet of depth was soon reached, and then the man threw out the spade upon the ground. The woman, meanwhile, had been plucking branches of evergreen, bringing them in armfuls and throwing them beside “the grave,” I thought. And now, with the utmost care and patience, the whole cavity was lined with these springs of evergreen, heald in place by twigs thrust into the banks on either side.

This done, the man sprang out. The two surveyed their work for a moment, and then after gazing once more, as if in anxiety, over the route by which they had come, approached the wagon. Having rolled up the canvas on one side, they lifted out a small mattress, depositing it upon a blanket which they had spread upon the ground. This mattress was not without its burden. The beams of the full moon enabled me to see thereon a slight form – that of a little girl who had scarcely lived out three years. The pretty white hands were folded over the breast. Long golden curls fell on either side upon the pillow. The face, which I could see with astonishing clearness, was wonderfully beautiful in its aspect of innocence and bore a life-like smile, as if in answer to the radiant queen of the sky, who seemed to be smiling, too as she looked steadfastly down upon the living and the dead.

The mother forthwith proceeded to arrange the spreads upon the child, tucking them and smoothing them down as if she were only putting her little one to bed, although while I heard no sob nor any expression of grief, I could see that her breast was heaving with sorrow and her face was visited by tears.

The two now knelt on either side, kissing their darling many times, and weeping over her, though trying apparently to comfort one another in their mutual wretchedness, if perchance there might come in their hearts a calm like that with which the moon was still sending down her beams to illumine the tearful scene.

Then laying hold of the blanket, they carried their darling to the grave, and by the aid of the bridle-reins, let the precious burden down into the place which they had so carefully prepared. Green bought were scattered over her until they covered the beautiful form many inches deep, and then the clods were gently replaced, and a little mound was heaped, and the child transferred from her mother’s bosom was sleeping at last in the bosom of the greater mother earth. The two sad mourners knelt again beside the grave and seemed to be engaged in prayer, lifting their faces now and then to the sky, as if in its infinite clear depths they saw the future hopes.

All this – though I still thought it unreal – had awakened in me the keenest interest and sympathy. But my attention was now suddenly diverted to a line of figures in the distance, somewhat beyond the spot where I had seen the wagon when I first awoke. There were horsemen who came sweeping on at a rapid pace as if engaged in eager pursuit. From the manner in which they rode, I knew they were Indians. Ah! I saw it all now and understood why these spectral visitors had so often looked back apprehensively in the direction from which they had approached. These pilgrims across the plains had seen signs of savages and had used the night to push on beyond their reach if haply they might bury their dead in peace and find safety themselves. But the foe had discovered their trail and followed them, bent on massacre.

I laid my hand instinctively on the rifle under the edge of my blanket that I might join in the defense, sad was about to cry out in warning of the danger I saw approaching, but instantly bethought myself that this was unreality, a mere vision, calling for no practical action, I might better let these shadows work out their tragedy to the end. I again restrained the dog, who seemed agitated, whether because he saw what I was seeing, or out of sympathy with my emotion – I know not which.

The two at the grave seemed unconscious of the threatened danger until their enemies were within a hundred yards when the man sprang up and lifted the woman also to her feet. They turned toward the wagon as if to gain its shelter and secure weapons for defense. It was too late. I saw flashes of fire and also a flight of arrows, still without a sound, however, to break the calm of the night.

Both the man and the woman staggered as if wounded. They stopped and turned face to face, throwing their arms about each other as if realizing that this was their last embrace. Another volley, and still clinging to each other in the agony of death, they fell together upon the grave of their child.

The Indians were not long in completing their work. Then catching the horses and harnessing them into the wagon, they hastened away as though themselves in fear of pursuit. I watched them until they disappeared and then was alone with my thoughts and the brilliant night.

I realized that I had seen a vision and, though I turned myself resolutely to rest, my sleep for the remainder of the night was fitful and disturbed. When finally I awakened again, the sun had risen, and under the influence of that great dispeller is illusions, and in spite of the vividness of the night’s experience, I began to think that after all I might have been only dreaming; especially when I saw that the space where I had seen the burial and the tragedy that followed was not open and clear, but overgrown with brush and young trees.

Nevertheless, yielding to a curiosity of which I was meanwhile almost ashamed, I soon made my way into the bushes. Parting these with my hands as I went forward and scanning the ground closely, I shortly experienced a new shock of surprise. For there in the exact spot marked by the night scene. Was a little mound and beside it the remains of two skeletons.

And not for a retrospective fact which gave to this weird experience of the night a personal significance. While I was yet a lad in my teens, my brother, twenty years older, had taken his young wife and only child and set out to cross the plains in pursuit of fortune. The mails had brought home tidings of the progress of their journey up to a certain point. Beyond this, all trace was lost, and we never heard of them again.

I have not been able to account satisfactorily for that I have related. Was this an indubitable information vouchsafed to me from another world as to the fate of my relatives? If so, why was it reserved for this time and place? Was it impossible that I should have this vision elsewhere? And if this is the case, then why? Had nature photographed these tragic scenes and preserved their reflection, reproduce them for an eye that was fitted by some occult law of sympathy to behold? Let the savants answer if they can, I cannot. – Edward B Bayne.

Hello and welcome everyone to Okie Investigations. My name is Trevor Shelby. This episode comes from the book Celebrated Criminal Cases of America and is in the public domain. It was written by Thomas Duke. The cool thing about this series is that this book is widely thought of as one of the first true crime storybooks to be published in the US. Here is the story. The Murder of Capitalist Nicholas Skerritt by Attorney Wright Le Roy. Written by Thomas Duke

Nicholas Skerritt arrived in San Francisco in March 1849 and almost immediately afterward engaged in the dry goods business on Montgomery Street near Bush.

Skerritt could never have been traced through life by the money he threw away, and after conducting his dry goods store for fifteen years, he retired with a fortune of $120,000, which he invested in real estate.

He was an eccentric old bachelor and resided at 503 Bush street with a Mr. Sam Dixon, a stockbroker, who was one of the few people in whom Skerritt confided his business affairs.

On August 5, 1883, Skerritt came home and informed Mr. and Mrs. Dixon that he had met a man named La Rue, who had just made considerable money in the Colorado mines. He stated that La Rue had a prepossessing appearance and that he (Skerritt) h ad that day consummated a deal whereby La Rue was to rent all of his property, with the right to sublet it.

On Sunday afternoon, August 12, La Rue called at Dixon’s home and had a conversation with Skerritt. On Monday, Skerritt left home and never returned. On Wednesday, Dixon received the following dispatch from Sacramento :

“Have made a clean sweep of my real and personal property to parties from Colorado. Going there to complete sale. Have one-half in hand. La Rue will take charge; favor him; he is solid and reliable. “

N. SKERRITT.”

This telegram aroused suspicion in the mind of Dixon, as it was not worded in the language ordinarily used by Skerritt. He took the telegram to Donald McLea, another friend of Skerritt, and McLea stated that he had received a similar dispatch.

Knowing that the Donohoe-Kelly Bank transacted considerable business for the missing man, these two men repaired to that institution and learned that they also had received a similar message.

On that same day, La Rue called at the home of the Dixons and stated that he came to take charge of Skerritt’s effects and took away all that he could carry conveniently.

By this time, Dixon’s suspicions were fully aroused, and he notified the police authorities. The case was assigned to Detective Robert Hogan, who ascertained that deeds had been filed with the Recorder showing the alleged transfer of nearly all of Skerritt’s property to La Rue.

On August 27, 1878, a lawyer named Wright Le Roy was sent to State Prison for a forgery committed in Alameda County, and, although he committed no physical violence, the circumstances in connection with the forgery were very similar to this case. Le Roy was liberated on May 27, 1883. These circumstances, and the similarity of names, caused Hogan to suspect that La Rue was in reality Le Roy, and that he could explain Skerritt’s disappearance.

It was learned that La Rue had made an appointment to call at Mr. McLea’s home, and Chief Crowley, Captain Lees, and Detective Byram were there to receive him. When he appeared, the officers covered him with revolvers and ordered him to throw up his hands. It was then seen that the man who assumed the name of La Rue was the ex-convict, Le Roy.

Captain Lees asked him why he sent the three telegrams from Sacramento, but he denied all knowledge of them, and he also denied removing Skerritt’s personal property from his home. Le Roy was taken into custody pending further investigation.

Captain Lees sent to the telegraph office at Sacramento and had the original messages forwarded to him, and it was apparent that they were in Le Roy’s handwriting. It was also proven by experts that it was Le Roy who forged the deeds filed with the Recorder.

When interrogated as to Skerritt’s whereabouts, Le Roy stated that Skerritt went to Sacramento on the Monday previous with two men named Townsend and Miller and that the three intended to go to Denver, where Skerritt was to be paid for the property which he had sold to these two men.

He was then sent back to his cell and, after realizing that his statement must have sounded ridiculous in view of the evidence already obtained, he entangled himself still more hopelessly by sending for Captain Lees and admitting that his statement regarding Skerritt was false, but that he was prepared to tell the facts. He then said:

“I met Townsend three weeks ago at Geary and Dupont streets, and he told me he was going to make a raise in some manner. At this time, Miller joined us and shortly after Skerritt passed, and I remarked that if Townsend had his (Skerritt’s) money, he would not have to make a raise. I then introduced Townsend to Skerritt, and afterwards, Townsend told me that he would capture Skerritt’s person and then his money. The next time I saw Townsend and Miller, they told me that they had accomplished their object. I told them that Skerritt’s friends would institute a search for him, so at my suggestion, they wrote the three telegrams which I sent from Sacramento. When I asked where Skerritt was, they laughed and said that he was O. K. in Contra Costa County.”

When a thorough search was made of Skerritt’s room, fifty dollars, two diamond studs, and other jewelry were found which had been overlooked by Le Roy but which proved conclusively to those who knew Skerritt that he would never willingly depart and leave such valuables behind.

It was then ascertained that Le Roy had been seen in Union Square with two ex-convicts named Jas. Dollar and Thomas McDonald and it was furthermore learned that Dollar went with Le Roy to a second-hand store on Fourth near Market street and purchased a mattress and blankets. But it was not clear what use these persons would make of them or where they would be taken.

Feeling confident that a murder had been committed, Detective Hogan requested Mr. Chichester, a handy-man in Skerritt’s employ, to accompany him to the different vacant buildings owned by the missing man.

The first place they went to was 1129 Ellis street, and upon opening the door, both men were sickened by the odor of decomposed flesh which confronted them. They found Skerritt’s body, black, swollen, and decomposed, in a sitting position against the wall in a closet, with a blanket thrown over it.

When Le Roy was arrested, he had several keys in his possession, all of which were accounted for, except a key for a Yale lock. He roomed at a lodging-house conducted by a Mr. Perkins at California and Powell streets, and underneath the mattress, several of Skerritt’s papers were found, but, as other articles were still missing which Le Roy took from Skerritt’s home, it was decided that the suspect must have another room and that the mysterious key for the Yale lock was the pass-key to the house where that room was located. A great number of duplicates were made, and officers were looking all over the city for a lock to fit this key, when one evening Captain Lees asked Detective Hogan to accompany him to the Grand Hotel. After remaining there a short time, they left, but when they had crossed Market street, Lees excused himself for a few moments and returned to the hotel.

Having nothing to do in the meantime, Hogan got out his duplicate key, and he can attribute his movements immediately afterward to nothing except his intuitive powers, for he went to the door of a lodging-house a few feet away, No. 620 Market street, and there found that his key opened the lock of the street door. When Lees returned, Hogan reported his discovery, but owing to the late hour, they decided to investigate further on the following morning. When they returned, they located Le Roy’s room, and in it, they found the remainder of the property stolen from Skerritt’s room, which Le Roy denied having taken. They also found twelve large cans of chlorid of lime, in which he probably intended to consume Skerritt’s body at the first opportunity.

It will be recalled that Le Roy purchased a mattress and blankets on Fourth street, and in addition to that, he purchased carpets at another place.

A lady living next door to 1129 Ellis street identified Le Roy as the man who called on her shortly after Skerritt disappeared and inquired if she had seen a wagon call with any furniture for the next flat.

When the officers arrived at 1129 Ellis street, they found the articles purchased on Fourth street, and afterward, Dollar and McDonald testified that they assisted in bringing them there for Le Roy. This house was one of the buildings for which Le Roy filed a forged deed with the Recorder.

On August 27, 1883, the Coroner’s jury returned a verdict in which they found that Skerritt was strangled to death by Le Roy. He was tried in Judge Ferral’s court and convicted of murder in the first degree.

He endeavored to persuade Governor Stoneman to interfere but failed, and on January 18, 1885, he was hanged by Sheriff Hopkins.