The blog is about is the murder of Eric Richins, allegedly killed by his wife Kouri.


Eric was from a very prominent Utah family.

The Richins family is one of the oldest and largest in Summit County, Utah. A notable member was Sheldon Richins, for whom Summit County’s Richins Building in Kimball Junction is named.

Eric was born on May 13, 1982 in Bountiful, Utah to Gene and Linda Richins.  He had two sisters – Katie and Amy.  

This information about Eric is from his obituary:

Being born into the Richins Legacy shaped Eric’s formative years and resulted in a lifetime of hard work, dedication, and fierce loyalty. Being the eldest was a dubious task, but he was up for the challenge and led and loved his sisters fiercely. At an early age, Eric learned the joys of keeping horses and cows around. He spent countless hours helping his dad work the ranch, hauling hay, feeding the animals, and mending fences. He loved his family unconditionally, and was a devoted son, brother, and uncle.

Eric was a family man, who always strove to be the absolute best father and husband. He was an attentive and loving father to his three sons Carter (9), Ashton (7), and Weston (5), and a devoted husband to the love of his life, and wife of nine years, Kouri (Darden) Richins. Eric did absolutely everything in his power to provide his family with every possible opportunity to learn, grow, and have fun.


Growing up Eric was a serious athlete and loved all sports, whether it was watching them or playing them. He was involved in cross country, basketball, baseball, and soccer. He was also the coach or assistant coach on all his boys’ teams. He spent countless hours coaching and teaching the boys to “play aggressive” and “give it their all!” Eric truly cared about every single child he coached and wanted the absolute best for all of them.

Eric was an avid outdoorsman and dedicated hunter.  He was an excellent archer and marksman, and had multiple trophy animals from all around the world including Africa, Mexico, Canada, and the United State.

Eric and his wife Kouri had been together for over a decade at the time of his death.   A woman named Linda King told the media how Kouri met Eric while she was working as a Home Depot cashier.  

“I said [to] go over there and check out with her, you know, so they did, and they ended up having a date,” said Linda. “From then on, they were like glued to each other. It was perfect, I thought.”

On the night of March 3, 2022, Kouri, Eric’s wife, said that they were celebrating a new home purchase.  According to the probable cause document, Kouri made Eric a Moscow Mule and took it to their bedroom at around 9pm, where he drank it while in bed.  An article by KPCW also says that he had a shot of alcohol and a THC gummy.

Before we move on with the story, I just wanted to address the house purchase.  The KPCW says the house was a $2m purchase.


Some info about the house:

A massive 22,000-square-foot mansion between Heber City and Midway has been unfinished for more than five years. The home is a bit of an eyesore in the valley and has been somewhat of a mystery to locals for the past half-decade. The Wasatch County property sits on 10 acres and was first constructed in 2017.

In 2017, Doug Roylance, the previous owner, started building the house there. The 22,800 square-foot house, which Roylance had intended to use as a communal space for rent and usage, had been initially valued at $7.6 million. Roylance was constructing a dream home with eight bedrooms, 12 bathrooms, two kitchens, a swimming pool, a golf simulator, and a rock climbing wall.


Roylance eventually put the unfinished mansion on the market and relocated to Guatemala, where he operates a philanthropic organization. The 10-acre property was purchased by a young couple relocating to the Heber Valley in January 2022 after spending nearly two years on the market.

The couple had intended to finish construction and move into the home until the husband unexpectedly passed away shortly after closing the sale on the property. Understandably, the current owner, now widowed, has been preoccupied for obvious reasons and has not resumed construction. She has re-listed the house for sale at an asking price of $4.75 million.

Kouri alleges that she went to bed that night in their childrens’ bedroom and she woke up at around 3am and headed to her own bed.  At this point, she realized that Eric was cold and not breathing and she called 911. 

When fire and EMS arrived, Kouri told them she had been doing CPR on Eric but they thought this was unlikely due to the amount of blood coming from his mouth.

When they asked her where Eric’s medications were,  Kouri said she didn’t know because “the maid just puts medications in random places.”

Police looked at Kouri’s story and her phone records.  She told them initially that when she went to sleep in the child’s bedroom, she left her phone plugged in next to her own bed and did not take it with her.  However, in the time between sleeping with the kids and calling 911, her phone was locked and unlocked multiple times and there was movement recorded on the phone.  Messages were also sent and received during the time period – these messages were deleted.


Eric was declared dead and an autopsy was conducted.  The levels of fentanyl found in his system were more than five times the lethal dosage.  The Medical Examiner determined that the fentanyl was illicit and not medical grade.

Following an investigation of Eric’s gastric fluid contents, the ME determined that the fentanyl was ingested orally.


Police seized Kouri’s phone and computers from the house for investigation.  Once they downloaded her data, they found communication between her and a person known in probable cause docs as CL.

CL has a police record -multiple counts of possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute etc.  


When detectives interviewed CL, they were told that Kouri contacted them at some point between Dec 2021 and Feb 2022 to ask for some prescription pain medication.  Kouri said the medication was for an investor with a back injury.

CL gave Kouri some hydrocodone pills a few days later.   Kouri told CL to leave the pills at a house that she was flipping.  This property was owned by Kouri at the time.

Kouri contacted CL a few weeks later and said that her investor wanted something stronger ‘ some of the Michael Jackson stuff.’.  Kouri specifically asked for fentanyl.  CL contacted a dealer and managed to get 15-30 fentanyl pills, which Kouri paid $900 for on February 11, 2022.

On Valentines Day that year, February 14, Eric and Kouri had dinner at their home.  Shortly after their dinner, Eric became very sick.  He told a friend that he thought Kouri was trying to poison him.  He broke out in hives and couldnt breathe.  He passed out and had to use his son’s EpiPen and take benadryl.

Kouri got another $900 worth of pills from CL around 2 weeks later.  These pills were left at a home she owned around February 26, 2022.  Eric died from a fentanyl OD on March 4, 2022.

After Eric died, police interviewed his family.  One of his sisters told police about an incident that occurred while he was on vacation in Greece a few years earlier.  Kouri had given him a drink that made him violently ill.  Eric told his sister that he believed Kouri had tried to kill him.

Police also looked into Eric’s life insurance situation.  He had held a joint policy with his business partner Cody Wright – their business was called C&E Stone Masonry.

Around a month before his death, in January 2022, Kouri logged into the policy.  She changed the policy and removed each of the men as the other’s beneficiary.  She named herself as the policy’s only beneficiary.  The insurance company notified the men of the change and they changed it back.  

After this, Eric changed the beneficiary of his will and his power of attorney from Kouri to his sister.

A warrant states he didn’t tell Kouri about the change because, according to his sisters, he believed Kouri might “kill him for the money” and wanted their kids to be financially secure.

“While investigating the death I was told by Eric’s family member that they suspected his wife had something to do with his death,” an investigator wrote in the warrant. “They advised he warned them that if anything happened to him she was to blame.”

Warrants allege he was planning to file for divorce, but he died before any proceedings began.

Kouri learned on March 5, after Eric’s death, that she had been cut out of the will.

The warrant in this case says that Kouri “assaulted” Eric’s sister, who showed up to the home.


“Up until that point, according to the family, Kouri had no idea she had been replaced in the will and Eric’s sister was put in charge of his estate including the home which made her financially unstable,” the warrant states.

On March 28, a few weeks after Eric’s death, Kouri sued Eric’s sister for control over his estate. She claims their prenuptial agreement entitles her to the money, family home and other assets.

Eric’s sister’s response to Kouri’s lawsuit mentions a pending homicide case. It remains to be seen how a criminal case will affect the civil proceedings, but Utah does have a so-called Slayer statute, which prevents killers from profiting from their crimes.

More information also emerged about the house purchase they were celebrating.  She wanted to buy it and flip it, but Eric thought it was too expensive.  Eric had told family members he was going to tell Kouri they weren’t buying the house.

In March 2023, Kouri published a children’s book about grief titled ‘ Are you with me?’

She set up an interview with news agency KPCW to promote the book, which she said “was designed to offer comfort and solace to young minds.”

Eric can be seen on the cover with angel wings and a halo watching over their youngest child while they grow up.

She told KPCW in April that “Are you with me?” was inspired by her own kids’ questions.

“You know, ‘Is dad with us?’” she said. “Because they’re going through the sadness of knowing that he’s not here, presently.”

During the interview, she disclosed plans to publish sequels. The next title in the works was “Mom, how far away is heaven?” as well as a book for young girls struggling with grief and husbands who lose their wives.


On Friday May 5, Kouri made the following FB post:

“Life is just so damn hard without you here! The cards I have been dealt just seem like a game that cant [sic] be played,” the caption read.


On Monday May 8, 2023, Kouri was arrested and charged with one first degree felony count of aggravated murder, as well as three second degree felony counts of possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance.

Judge Richard Mrazik has scheduled a detention hearing for May 19.


Just to note, Kouri’s book has been pulled from Amazon.

The first case we are going to discuss is one that is scarily close to home.  It is the murder of podcaster Zohreh Sadeghi (33) and her husband by a stalker.

Zohreh was a tech podcaster who lived in Redmond, Washington.  

https://www.linkedin.com/in/zohrehsadeghi/

Her linked in says that she was a Software Engineer at Promontory MortgagePath LLC.  She described herself on the website:

I am a driven, self-motivated individual, looking to expand my horizons by learning to build software the right way, as part of a bigger team. I am self-sufficient and thrive in ambi- guity.

She lived with her husband Mohammed Naseri in a $1.6m home in Redmond.  Redmond is a popular area for tech people to live in as it houses the headquarters of Microsoft.  

A neighbor named Jamie Lynn Burns spoke to the media about how friendly the couple were.

“They were just so friendly and inviting. We were like, ‘Oh my gosh, we couldn’t have found better neighbors.’”


I believe that Zohreh’s mother was staying with the couple at the time – I have read that Zohreh had back surgery recently and wasn’t as mobile as before, so I am not sure if the mother was living there permanently or was there to assist her daughter while she was recovering.  

Zohreh’s podcast was aimed at helping Farsi-speaking people find jobs in the tech industry.    I believe the podcast is how Zohreh came in contact with her soon-to-be stalker, Ramin Khodakaramrezaei.


As some background into Ramin, I believe he was originally from Texas.  He had been married to a woman named Neda Meshabim for seven years prior to this incident and they had a daughter.  The couple had divorced but were still close.  His ex wife said Ramin often shared details about his love life with her since the two are from Iran and don’t have relatives in the US.  Ramin owned his own trucking company in Texas.

Ramin came across the show through the app ClubHouse and he started emailing and messaging Zoreh following that.  

Redmond Police spokesperson Jill Green told the Daily Beast:

“Apparently he got to know her because of a podcast that she was doing and they struck up kind of a friendship, talked. But then he began to just send a lot of messages to the point that she decided to disengage and talk to us and our investigators in getting a restraining order.”

Redmond Police Chief Darrell Lowe said that Zohreh got in touch with police regarding “harassing behavior” in late 2022 after Ramin repeatedly contacted her by text and over the phone. He allegedly once called her over 100 times in a single day before resorting to in-person stalking.

The officer also said that the Ramin followed Zohreh to a conference in Denver “in the latter part of 2022” and had visited her residence prior to the night of the murder.

Zohreh told police that Ramin called her more than 10 times a day and left more than 20 daily messages for her husband — some “vulgar, angry and threatening.”


After Zohreh filed the first complaint on November 6, 2022, Ramin continued to call her throughout November and December and he even traveled to the area to stay in hotels close to her home.  

Zohreh wrote in the protection order that Ramin “has bursts of anger” and his “delusions make me fear for my life and the lives of my loved ones.’ 

She also said that Ramin said he would show up at her door, “burn himself” and “set fire” on her house by burning the tree that she loves.

She also wrote that the man sent her voicemails saying he won’t let her go and the “only thing that will make all this stop is if he killed himself or died.”

She also wrote about how she feared her decreased mobility would make her an easy target.

“I had a major back surgery, and my mobility has been affected, and I need care 24/7,” she wrote.  “This makes me fear about my ability to respond to a crisis, especially because Mr. Khodakaramrezaei has ignored all other avenues.”

“All of this has caused me great distress and pain, and now I am suffering from a deep-seated fear for my safety. It has taken a toll on my recovery. I haven’t been able to open the curtains in my bedroom out of fear of him being outside watching me.”


The protection order was 12 pages long, filled with information about inappropriate communication by Ramin.  She outlined in the document that Ramin said the only way he would leave her alone is if she was dead.


On December 20, Ramin went to Zohreh’s house to deliver flowers to her.  He waited to go to the door until her husband had left the house.  He also sent her gifts on two other occasions and had once arranged for a jazz band to play outside her house for two hours.  Thankfully, this ‘concert’ was cancelled before it began.  

Ramin’s ex-wife has also said that he told her that he was dating Zohreh and that he did not believe she was married.   He then told her that he and Zohreh had broken up against his wishes.  She said her ex-husband’s behavior changed after that. She said he was crying the final few times she spoke with him.


As Ramin was a long-haul trucker, police allegedly had trouble tracking him down to serve the protection order to.  The police spokesperson Jill Green said “Our detectives had warrants to get information from his phone and were trying to serve the no contact order to the suspect [but] had not done so yet. Being that he is a trucker, he’s hard to pin down.”

Ramin’s stalking of Zohreh continued right up until the time of the murders.  On February 28, 2023, he left her two voicemails which she said were  “vulgar, angry, and threatening.” She also said he installed an app on his phone to record her without consent.

In the early morning hours of Friday March 10, 2023, Ramin broke into Zohreh’s house, where she, her husband and her mother were sleeping.  He broke into through the window of Zohreh’s mother’s bedroom, where the two had an altercation.  Thankfully, the mother managed to flee the house and run to a neighbor for help. 

Zohreh’s husband Mohammed was shot and he tried to flee the scene before collapsing and dying in the front yard.  He had been shot in the chest.

When police entered the home, they found Zohreh and Ramin both deceased.  Both were found in the primary bedroom of the house.  Zohreh had been shot to death and Ramin died from a self-inflicted gunshot. 

After the murders, Police Chief Darrell Lowe spoke : “A restraining order is simply a piece of paper that allows officers to take enforcement action should a suspect violate the court order. But a piece of paper does not protect a person when someone is intent on causing them harm.  In this case, the victim did everything that they possibly could.  It’s a tragic event.”

One of the most documented cases of stalking resulting in murder is that of Rebecca Schaeffer.  


Rebecca was 21 when she was murdered in LA in July 1989.  

Rebecca was born November 6, 1967 in Eugene, Oregon.  Her parents were Danna and Dr Benson Schaeffer.  She was their only child.  She was raised in Portland, Oregon and attended Lincoln High School.


Rebecca apparently aspired at an early age to become a Rabbi.  She changed her mind when she was offered some teen modelling roles.  In 1984 when she was 16, she worked with Elite Model Management in NYC for the summer and with her parents’ permission, she stayed there to pursue a modelling career.  

In late 1984, Rebecca began her acting career.  She had roles on Guiding Light, One Life to Live and My Sister Sam amongst others.  She also had supporting roles in several movies.  

A man named Robert John Bardo began stalking Rebecca in 1986.  He would have been around 16 at that time and she would have been around 18.  

Robert had previously been obsessed with child peace activist Samantha Smith, who was killed in a plane crash at age 13 in 1985.  Robert traveled to Maine at one point in an attempt to meet Samantha but he was stopped by police and turned around. 

After Samantha died, he turned his attention to Rebecca.  He wrote her numerous letters and she replied to one of those.  Rebecca responded, writing that his letter was “the most beautiful” that she had ever received. On her letter, she drew a peace sign, a heart, and signed it: “With love from Rebecca.” The day Robert received the letter he wrote in his diary: When I think of her, I would like to become famous to impress her.

In 1987, he traveled to LA and attempted to get onto the set of My Sister Sam.  He was turned away by security.  He came back one month later, armed with a knife.  Security again turned him away.  He wrote in his diary at that time ‘ I don’t lose.  Period.’  

This rejection seems to have deterred him for a short while.  He went back to Tucson, Arizona where he shifted his obsession towards Madonna and Tiffany.  

Robert became obsessed with Rebecca again when he saw in her a scene from ‘Scenes from the Class Struggle in Beverly Hills.’  In the scene, she was in bed with another actor.  He decided that she should be punished for ‘becoming another Hollywood whore.’  He wrote in his diary that she had become ‘one more of the bitches of Hollywood.’  

Robert paid a private detective agency $250 to find Rebecca’s home address from DMV records.  His brother helped him buy a handgun.  I have read online that Robert tried to buy a gun and was denied.  

“When Robert John Bardo tried to purchase a Ruger GP100 .357 magnum at Jensen’s Firearms in Tucson Az. in the summer of 1989, he filled out the paperwork answering yes to having been committed to a mental facility, a disqualification. (He was also underage but he had a fake Driver’s License that would have worked.)

The salesman, a member of the Air Force named Bob, told him he could not purchase the revolver. Bardo got irate and said he wanted to fill out another copy, the salesman sought out help and Jerome Larochelle who also worked at Jensen’s, told the guy absolutely no way and he told Bardo he could not own a firearm and to “Get the fuck out!” (Because he did not like the vibes he got from him!) The two then escorted Bardo from the store.

Larochelle, his friend Bob and the Manager on duty at Jensen’s hung Bardo’s disqualified form on the bulletin board and wrote “DO NOT SELL TO THIS INDIVIDUAL!”


The next morning Bardo came in with his brother who purchased the same Ruger GP100 revolver and gave it to his brother when they were out side of the shop, (a violation of federal law. His brother would have known that because it asks you that question on the form and warns that such ‘straw man’ purchases are a violation of Federal Law!)

Robert went back to LA for the third time.  He walked around the neighborhood where Rebecca lived, asking people if she lived there and if they had seen her. 

Once he was certain that the address he had for her was correct, he rang the doorbell.  Rebecca was waiting for a movie script to be delivered so she answered the door.   Robert showed her the letter and autograph that she had previously sent him.  She became creeped out (rightly so) and told him not to come to her house again.

He left and went to a diner and had breakfast.  

He went back to her apartment an hour later and knocked on the door again.  When Rebecca opened the door, he said she had a ‘cold look on her face.’

He pulled out the handgun that his brother had helped him buy and shot her twice in the chest at point blank range.  As she fell to the ground, she uttered ‘Why?’.  

Robert recounted the murder to police:

“She had this kid voice…sounded like a little brat or something…said I was wasting her time! …Wasting her time! No matter what, I thought that was a very callous thing to say to a fan, you know…I grabbed the door…guns still in the bag…I grab it by the trigger…I come around, and kapow, and she’s like screaming… aaahhh…screaming…why, aaahhh … and it’s like, oh God…”

A neighbor named Richard Goldman heard the gunshots and he rushed to the lobby and found Rebecca’s body.  He saw a man in a yellow shirt (Robert) running away from the scene.  

Rebecca was rushed to Cedars Sinai Medical Center where she was pronounced dead 30 minutes after her arrival.  

Robert fled back to Tucson where he was arrested the next day.  He was found after motorists called 911 to report a man running around in traffic on the Interstate.  Once he was taken into custody, he confessed to Rebecca’s murder.  

A year after the slaying, Robert gave an interview in which he stated, “I was a fan of hers and I may have carried it too far. But a lot of things have appeared in the press to make me out to be a monster. If I had one wish where if it was to ever come true it would be for Rebecca Schaeffer to be alive today.”


Robert was sentenced to life without parole by Superior Court Judge Dino Fulgoni on December 20, 1991.  He made a statement:

“The idea I killed her for fame is totally ridiculous. I do realize the magnitude of what I’ve done. I don’t think it needs to be compounded by a bunch of lies because she’s an actress.”

Rebecca’s murder played a role in a law being established in California that prohibits the DMV from releasing addresses.  It also prompted the LAPD to create their first Threat Management Team.  


According to the legislation, a stalker is defined as “someone who willfully, maliciously and repeatedly follows or harasses another victim and who makes a credible threat with the intent to place the victim or victim’s immediate family in fear of their safety.” There must be at least two incidents to constitute the crime and show a “continuity of purpose” or credible threat.

A more recent stalking murder case is that of Christina Grimmie.  Christina was a singer and YouTuber who was murdered at age 22 in 2016 in Orlando, Florida.


Christina Victoria Grimmie was born to Tina and Albert Grimmie on March 12, 1994 in New Jersey.  Christina had an older brother, Marcus. 

When Christina was 6, her father noticed that she had a talent for singing.  She started playing piano at age 10 and said she played by ear.  

Christina began posting to YouTube in 2009 at age 15.  Her user name was zeldaxlove64.  She said that she started her YouTube channel so that people could connect with her music.  

The first video she uploaded was a cover of Hannah Montana’s ‘Don’t Wanna Be Torn.’

In 2011, she placed second in a MyYouTube competition, behind Selena Gomez.    She went on to perform backup vocals for Selena during the 2011 DigiTour.  She opened for Selena and the Jonas Brothers during the Concert of Hope.  

She released an EP in June 2011.  It debuted at number 35 on the Billboard 200 chart.  This is when things started to really ramp up for her.  She appeared on the Ellen show in October 2011.  She performed at the American Music Awards in November 2011.  

Christina moved to LA in 2012 to pursue her singing career.  She signed with Creative Artists Agency.  

By April 2013, her YouTube channel had more than 375 million views and she had more than 2 million subscribers.

In 2014, Christina auditioned for The Voice.  She performed Miley Cyrus’ Wrecking Ball and all the judges (Adam Levine, Usher, Shakira and Blake Shelton) turned their chairs for her.  She opted for Adam Levin after he told her that she had the potential to be a huge star.  User said that she was a ‘baby Celine Dion’.  Shakira said that her voice was ‘out of this world.’  

Selena Gomez and Justin Bieber supported her during her time on The Voice.  She finished in third place.  Carson Daly said he was ‘shocked’ that she did not win.  


So this info gives you some background as to where Christina was going. She was a rising star.  

On June 10, 2016, Christina performed at the Plaza Live in Orlando, Florida.  She posted earlier that day on her social media that she was going to be there and she asked her fans to attend the concert.  It is estimated that round 300 fans attended.  


She ended her performance at around 10pm and went to sign autographs inside the venue. Around 100 fans were waiting to meet her.  At 10.24pm, a fab named Kevin James Loibl (27) walked up to Christina.  He didn’t say a word.  Christina mistook this for shyness and she opened her arms to give him a hug.  Christina often did this if she thought a fan was too shy to say hello.

Kevin then pulled out a Glock 19 pistol and shot Christina three times at point blank range.  Christina fell to the floor and a scuffle ensued between Kevin and Christina’s brother (who was her road manager).  Kevin broke free and fatally shot himself.  

CPR was performed on Christina and she was taken to Orlando Regional Medical Center in critical condition.  She was pronounced dead just before 11pm that night.   An autopsy showed that Christina had been shot three times – once in the head and twice in the chest.  

When police examined Kevin’s body, they found two handgun magazines in his pocket, a knife strapped to his ankle, a Florida driver’s license, a ticket to Christina’s show and a hotel key for the Courtyard by Marriott in Orlando.  

Police went to the hotel and showed the front desk manager a photo of Kevin.  The manager ‘instantly’ asked if he was the suspect in Christina’s shooting.  The manager said he was ‘strange’.  He had checked into the hotel the day before the concert, had no luggage and had paid $269 for the room.  Police investigated the hotel room Kevin had stayed in:

“There was no luggage; no personal belongings visible and the bed looked as if he slept on top of the covers. In the trash it appeared he had purchased some food from the hotel snack bar and ate it in his room,” the report says.

Police spoke to Kevin’s family who said that he rarely left his room except to go to his job at Best Buy.  They had never heard him mention Christina and never saw him watch The Voice.  They didn’t know he owned guns.  They did say he spent a ‘great deal of time on the computer in his room’.  

Kevin’s Best Buy supervisor Luke Dahl described him as ‘socially awkward and detached.’  He said Kevin had no social skills and worked in the back of the store where he had no interaction with customers.  

Kevin had encrypted his phone which meant that police were not able to extract any data from it.  He had also intentionally destroyed the hard drive on his computer.  

Cory Dennington who was Kevin’s friend for 15 years said that he was his ‘only friend in the world’.  He told police that Kevin had become fixated on Christina over the past year.  He said that Kevin ‘watched everything having to do with her.’  

Cory said Kevin “spent most of his waking hours watching Christina on YouTube as well as constantly monitoring her social media accounts. Despite following her on social media, Kevinl himself did not have a Facebook, Twitter, or any other social media account,” the police report says.

Kevin claimed he had been an atheist but told Cory that Christina’s Christianity had spurred a change of heart.  He told Cory that Christina had ‘helped him to see the world in a different way.’  

Before the murder, Kevin lost 50 lbs, underwent Lasik surgery, had his teeth whitened and got hair implants.  He told Cory that he had done it all for Christina.  

Around two months before the murder, Cory became concerned about Kevin’s obsession with Christina.  When he tried to raise the topic with Kevin, he would ‘become angry and defensive.’  Kevin told Cory that Christina was his soul mate.

At least five of Kevin’s Best Buy coworkers told police they knew of his obsession with Christina. They “would good naturedly tease Loibl about his ‘internet crush.’

In terms of security for the event, bags should have been checked but there were no metal detectors and attendees were not frisked.  

Kevin had never been previously arrested and had purchased the two guns legally.  He was in the police system for minor issues such as petty theft and a 2008 car accident.  He was once accused of battery but no charges were filed after the victim became uncooperative.  

Christina’s family released the following statement:

“It is with a heavy heart that we can confirm that Christina has passed and went home to be with the Lord,” Grimmie’s rep said in a statement. “She was shot at her show in Orlando and, unfortunately, didn’t survive the gun shot wounds. We ask at this time that you respect the privacy of her family and friends in their time of mourning. If you’d like to give back to Christina’s family in her memory, please consider donating to the families GoFundMe page in their time of need.”

Adam Levine also made a statement:

“Behati and I are absolutely devastated and heartbroken by Christina Grimmie’s tragic death. Our hearts go out to her family. Christina was a natural, a gifted talent that comes along so rarely. She was taken from us too soon. This is yet another senseless act of extreme violence. I am left stunned and confused how these things can conceivably continue to happen in our world.”
This blog is in chronological order.

MONDAY MARCH 20, 2023

Jury selection commenced on this day.


Jury selection continued on March 21.


MONDAY APRIL 3, 2023

Opening statements were read on this day. The jury in this case is made up of 11 men and 7 women.

This info about Day 1 of the trial is from Gazette.com:


Sane or insane? That is the driving question in the trial of Letecia Stauch, who is accused of killing her 11-year-old stepson Gannon Stauch in January 2020. 

During opening statements on Monday afternoon in a near-capacity El Paso County courtroom, prosecutors and defense attorneys said they believe they have the answer to the question of sanity, and that they plan to present expert testimony to prove it. 

Defense attorney Will Cook claims that a defense-hired expert, Dr. Dorothy Lewis, found Letecia Stauch had a “psychotic crack” at the time she allegedly killed Gannon Stauch, and thus, found her insane. 

Allen began his opening statement by displaying a picture of Gannon Stauch and telling the jury that the case will come down to insanity, and that by the end of the trial the prosecution will prove Letecia Stauch was sane at the time of Gannon Stauch’s killing. 


TUESDAY APRIL 4, 2023


Source for this day – KKTV.


Gannon Stauch’s father, Al Stauch, took the stand Tuesday, testifying against his ex-wife for hours.

Al Stauch is the first witness in the trial.

District Attorney Michael Allen first asked him to identify his son based on a photo that was shown in court. Al Stauch said, fighting back tears, “that’s my boy.”

The first half of the day was testimony relating to the Stauch family background.


Al explained he is in the Army National Guard in a full-time position, and that he has been re-stationed several times. He also told jurors that his move to Alaska for an assignment caused tension in his relationship with Letecia at the time. He also told the jury, Letecia wanted to live beyond their financial means, which also caused relationship issues.

11 News Reporter Melissa Henry tweeted updates from the courtroom (below), as a two hour recorded phone call was played between Al and Letecia. That call was arranged through the FBI with Al Stauch’s cooperation. In that call, Al asked Letecia multiple times, “Did you kill Gannon?” Letecia replied “no,” every time, and at points she was heard crying and screaming.

Al Stauch also accuses Letecia in that call of changing her story several times as to what happened to Gannon.

Letecia appeared the same in court as she has recently– with her hair covering her face in a way that the rest of the room cannot see her face. She took notes and talked quietly with her lawyers.

The calls between Al and Tee were played into day 3.  Tee can be heard on the calls repeatedly asking for immunity.

On this day, a Florida Bridge Inspector that discovered Gannon’s remains testified that he saw two little feet and a head after finding the body in a suitcase. 

On Day 4, we learned some more about Tee’s shadiness.  She applied for a job in January 2020 to help students with special needs.  She provided a fake number for a job reference  – she said the number belonged to a Connie Huddle, when it actually belonged to Gannon.


It was confirmed in court on day 4 that Tee was in Florida on February 4, 2020 and that she was in the same area where Gannon was found a month later.

The jury were shown photos of Gannon’s clothes and bedding that day.  They were also shown the bullet which had been removed from his head.

A neighbor of Tee’s took the stand and spoke about how she had actually unusually following Gannon’s disappearance.  The neighbor said Tee never searched and did one interview where she focused on defending herself, instead of asking for help in finding Gannon.  

Dep. Christopher Ganstine recounted Tee’s fight or flight response when she was presented with a warrant. Dep. Ganstine said Tee ran in a full sprint away from him. When he handcuffed her, he said she was hysterical, screaming, and yelling obscenities.

On Day 5, the doctor that conducted Gannon’s autopsy testified that his cause of death was gunshot wound to the jaw, as well as blunt head trauma.

A detective testified that when he searched the residence, Gannon’s room smelled like ammonia bleach.

A reporter testified to interviewing Teeon January 31, 2020. In the interview she says she hopes when Gannon comes home, she gets a sincere apology from her critics, especially her husband. She then asks to redo her answer. In her second answer she is seen crying and pleading for Gannon to come home.


On Day 6, Tee’s brother testified that he saw her struggling with a suitcase.

LE tracked her movements in the days after Gannon vanished.  They know that she moved out of the house and stayed with family at an Extended Suites hotel.  She also rented a Budget truck and drove through Texas, Alabama, Florida, South Carolina and Rhode Island.

Law enforcement spoke in court on this day and said they found hits for blood in the garage, laundry, basement stairs, storage room and in Gannon’s room.

On Day 7, Tee’s initial statements about Gannon’s disappearance were played for the jury.  This also included her recollection of being raped by Eguardo.  A nurse testified regarding this and said that an involuntary physical exam was conducted on Tee but no sexual assault exam was done as Tee left before it could take place.

On Day 8, a witness who took crime scene pics testified that a gun was found in the master bedroom on top of a chest of drawers.  It appeared to be able to hold 17 rounds and 16 rounds were counted in the gun.

On Day 9, Harley Hunt, Tee’s daughter took the stand.  She explained that she initially believed that Tee had nothing to do with Gannon’s death.

“I’m still in shock. I defended her for years,” Harley said through tears. “I just feel like I’ve been manipulated and lied to.”

Harley was 20 when she testified and had been 17 I believe at the time of the murder.

She told the court that she had a good relationship with Gannon and his sister. 

She went on to describe the day Gannon was reported missing. 

“[Stauch] said that she asked to come home by like 5 or 6 and that we were going to go eat sushi,” Harley testified. “When time had gone by and he didn’t get back, she was like, I guess he didn’t want to eat sushi. And then after that we started looking for him.”

When asked whether it was unusual for Gannon not to come when he was supposed to, Harley said ‘Yes”

She described her mom as “worried” and said they drove to a friend of Gannon’s and learned he wasn’t there.

Harley also spoke about the trip with her mother across the country shortly after Gannon’s disappearance and testified that they drove with the air conditioning on even though it was wintertime. She was asked on the stand whether she knew or had any idea that Gannon’s body was in the back of the van.

“The thought just never came across my mind,” Harley said. “I just never thought my mom would do that. I didn’t see her to be the person to do that. So I never even questioned it.”

Harley also told the court she was a ‘hard sleeper’ and said that she would never have woken up if Tee left their hotel room during the night.  


“Ms. Hunt, I want to ask you a direct question: Did you help your mother throw that suitcase over a bridge in Pensacola, Florida?” asked prosecutor Dave Young.

“No, I did not,” Harley replied.

“When I found out it [Gannon’s remains] was discovered in Florida, it was just weird because, like to myself, I was like we were in Florida. But I kept like, wanting to think it was a coincidence,” Hunt testified. “That somebody did follow us. Or there was a different story.”


On Day 10, more information about what was found at the Stauch home was revealed.  

Commander Mitch Mihalko said he believed something violent happened in the Stauch home because of the blood patterns and stains found in Gannon’s room. He said the scene was locked down on February 7, 2020.

CSI Alyssa Berriesford analyzed the blood stains in Gannon’s bedroom on the walls, baseboard, and floor area. “There was something dynamic that happened there, more than just a single event that happened in that room,” she said.

Alyssa also said that there had been an attempt to clean the blood.  She said some of the stains were blurred and altered.  

She also said that the blood stains indicated there had been a gunshot, blunt force injury and sharp force injury.

On Day 11, jurors heard another call between Al and Tee that had been recorded by the FBI.  

This call took place on February 15, 2020.  Al can be heard to be frustrated in the call as he tries to get answers from Tee.  She says at one point ‘I’m tired of being portrayed as the killer of a child I love.’


Another call was played and Al was being coached by an FBI agent to try to get answers.

The call began with Al asking, “I feel like this is all my fault in the end because I was gone when it happened.” Al then began asking questions about the puddle of blood in the corner of Gannon’s room where his bed was that seeped down to the concrete floor.

Another phone call was heard, this one between Tee and an FBI Agent.  Tee was asked to describe in detail about the day Gannon disappeared.  Tee said that she tried to Al a bike from Craiglist, and that she went to Dunkin’ Donuts, and Petco twice. Letecia then explained how when she and Gannon got home, Letecia heard a loud noise downstairs. Letecia said when she went downstairs, a man was standing near the storage room.

On Day 12, more calls were listened to.  One was five hours long and it showed Tee being questioned by police.  She was told she was being arrested for murder and her rights were explained.

“So, Gannon was murdered?” she asked. FBI Agent Grusing explained they can’t have that conversation unless she’s advised of her rights. Tee said she had an attorney, but agreed to speak with the agent and at no point asked for her lawyer. During the conversation Letecia repeatedly told the agent that Gannon is alive and “I can help you” but said she needed “someone who is going to help me.” She said she needed protection for her family.

FBI Agent John Grusing’s testimony went on into Day 13.  He said that Tee would challenge him on statements about knowing what happened to Gannon. 

On Day 14, FBI Agent Kevin Hoyland spoke about cell phone data that had been taken from phones belonging to Tee, Gannon and Harley.

There were two outgoing calls made from Gannon’s phone at 7.30pm on January 27.  He had already been reported missing by that point.

GPS data also shows that Tee’s vehicle was in the are of Palmer Lake on January 28.  Gannon’s blood would be later found there on a board.  

On February 4, Tee’s van was powered up at 4.15am in Florida, less than two miles from where Gannon’s body would eventually be found.

Dr. Christine Mohr, the Mental Health Director at the El Paso County Jail, testified to an assessment she did of Yee on March 5, 2020.

Letecia appeared calm and polite throughout the interview.

Letecia denied having any disorders, in-patient or out-patient treatment.

The same doctor assessed Tee on March 9 and Tee described herself as mentally fine and not guilty.

Dr Mohr interviewed Tee again on March 20.  Tee was told about Gannon’s body being found during this interview.  She was described as tearful and overwhelmed and denied ever being in Florida.

Tee first raised the issue of competency and asked for an evaluation on June 5, 2020.

On Day 15, Dr Jackie Grimmett who is a forensic psychologist, testified about completing a competency evaluation on Tee.

This evaluation happened in December 2020, to determine if Tee had a mental disability.

The doctor testified that Tee understood the proceedings and was able to assist in her defense.

Dr Grimmett said Tee did tell her a story about vampires visiting her jail cell, but later admitted she got the names from Twilight.

The doctor said it was her opinion that Tee was faking some of her symptoms.  She confirmed that Tee did have some traits of borderline personality disorder and narcissistic but that she did not qualify to be diagnosed with either.

Dr Leondra Torres also testified.  She said that she conducted a competency evaluation and a sanity evaluation on Tee in 2022.

Dr Torres said that Letecia’s story changed between the evaluations she administered.


In 2020, Letecia said she began to be molested at 12 years old, but said the molestation began at 9 in 2022.

In August 2020, Letecia denied having any inpatient treatment for mental health issues, then in December 2020 said she had received treatment in Canada, and in March 2022 repeated the story about Canada.

On Day 16, Tee said she felt sick and this delayed the trial.  She was warned by the judge about making noises in court when she disagreed with what witnesses were saying.

Dr Torres returned to the stand.  The jury were shown a portion of an interview between Tee and this doctor.

In the clip, Tee described an accidental shooting where she shot someone wearing a cape.  She said she later learned this was Gannon.

Tee said that she would never purposely hurt Gannon and that she had been traveling between personalities.  She also said that she could bring Gannon back from the dead.

Dr Torres gave an opinion on Tee’s sanity.  ‘It was that Mrs Stauch was sane at the time of the crime.’

On Day 17, Intelligence Analyst Kevin Clark testified about CCTV.  He said that it was not typical for Tee to back the car into the garage or driveway but that she did this on the days following Gannon’s disappearance.

He also explained how he had studied Tee’s phone records and said that she used her phone frequently, except on the day Gannon disappeared.  Her phone use stopped from late morning til early afternoon.

Kevin testified that he found notes on Letecia’s phone titled, “In the case of a missing child Gannon Stauch” that included questions like, “Did you accidentally hurt him in a physical way? Did you murder your stepson? Do you know personally who was involved in your stepson’s disappearance?”

He also said that there was an outgoing call placed from Gannon’s phone to Gannon’s mother’s phone at 10:03 p.m. on the night Gannon was reported missing. Kevin testified that Gannon was not alive when that call was made.


After calling 50 witnesses, the state rested its case on Day 18.

Dr Ronda Niederhauser was next on the stand.  She treated Tee in 2019 and diagnosed her with generalised anxiety.

This doctor said that she did not think Tee was a danger to herself or others and that she did not show signs of a severe mental disorder.

Dr Dorothy Lewis also testified.  This doctor is an expert in serial killers and dissociative identity disorder.  

Dr Lewis said that she believes Tee switched into a different identity as a result of childhood abuse.  She also said that she believes Tee does not know what happened to Gannon and that she was not sane at the time of the killing.

Dr Lewis continued her testimony again on Day 19.  The jury were shown some excerpts of a 14 hour interview from 2022 where Tee spoke in an accent as ‘Maria.’  She said that she shot him because she thought he was an intruder and said ‘He wasn’t supposed to die.  It wasn’t supposed to be him.’


Dr Lewis said Tee’s actions were ‘crazy’ and not ‘logical or smart.’

After the jury was dismissed on this day, the judge asked Tee if she would testify and she confirmed that she would not.

Closing arguments came on Day 20.  Prosecutors emphasised the brutality of Gannon’s death.  They also spoke about how Tee attempted to conceal the crime and that this showed premeditation.  The prosecution said this showed Tee was sane because she was trying to manipulate and misdirect the investigation.

The prosecution argued that Tee killed Gannon because she hated him and wanted to leave Al to start a new life.

Tee’s defense rebutted that she had no motive to kill Gannon and this meant she must have been psychotic.  They also argued that the brutal way in which Gannon died confirmed that Tee was psychotic.

The jury deliberated for a few hours before they broke for the weekend.


The jury reconvened on Monday May 8 and quickly announced that they had reached a verdict.

Tee was found guilty on all counts, including first-degree murder, murder of a child under 12 by a person in a position of trust, tampering with physical evidence, and tampering with a deceased human being.

Tee showed no emotion as the verdict was read.

Sentencing started for Tee around 30 minutes after the verdict was read.  Judge Werner made his feelings clear.

He said the case was the most horrific that he had ever seen and told Tee that she had showed no remorse during the process.


Gannon’s mother Landen also read a statement:

“Mother to mother, I trusted her with my children,” she said.

Landen went on to say that Letecia cannot love anyone but herself and is incapable of caring for another human being, “She had everyone fooled… When all along she was the one hurting innocent children, breaking my kids and murdering my son.”

“Gannon will always be my son. That will never be taken away.”

Al also spoke.  “I would never have left you home alone with a murderer and the person who would be the last one to see you alive.” 

Tee was sentenced to two life sentences without parole, 12 years in prison for tampering with a deceased human body, and 18 months for tampering with physical evidence.

This episode/blog is about the death of Boston Police Officer, John O’Keefe.

The two main people involved in this case are John, and his girlfriend Karen Read.

John died on January 29, 2022 and he was 46 at the time of his death.

John was born and raised in Braintree, Mass.  He attended Braintree High School and later Northeastern University. He then went on to earn his master’s degree in criminal justice from UMass. He had been a Boston Police Officer for the past 16 years.

John was the legal guardian to his niece Kayley and nephew Patrick.  The children’s parents died months apart in 2013/2014.  Kristen Furbush died from cancer in November 2013.  Her husband Stephen was 39 when he died in January 2014 from a heart attack.  I believe Kayley was 6 when her dad died, and Patrick was 3.  So at the time John died, they would have been around 14 and 11.


Karen was 41 at the time of John’s death. She worked as a finance lecturer at Bentley University in Massachusetts and she was also an equity analyst at Fidelity. . According to her LinkedIn profile, she studied at Bentley University and graduated from Elkin B. McCallum Graduate School of Business. 

We will now head to January 2022.  Around mid January, John’s niece Kayley heard him talking to Karen about their relationship.  He apparently told her that he thought their relationship had run its course and that it had become unhealthy.  By that point, the couple had been seeing each other for around two years.  I believe before that, the couple had been on-again, off-again.  Friends and family have said that Karen and John argued frequently.  I have read that the couple were living together at the time of John’s death.


The prosecution in this case have released a detailed timeline of what happened prior to John’s death, so we will begin with that.

On Friday January 28, 2022, John is seen at 7.37pm on CCTV arriving at C.F. McCarthy’s in Canton, Mass.  According to the venue’s bio: We are a classic Irish pub focusing on fresh food and craft beer in Canton center.


Karen can be seen on CCTV arriving at the same venue at 8.51pm.

The prosecution then go into a timeline of Karen’s drinking – between 8.58pm and 10.22pm – so around 90 minutes, she consumed 6 drinks.

At 10.40 pm, John and Karen can be seen leaving the venue.  Karen was holding her final drink from the venue as she left.

They then went to the Waterfall Bar and Grille and arrived there at 10.54pm.  I believe they met up with some friends here, Jennifer and Matthew McCabe.  The McCabe’s were more John’s friends and apparently did not know Karen that well.   

At 12.10am on Saturday January 29, Karen can be seen leaving the Waterfall Bar.  John follows behind her, carrying a drink.  

They started walking together towards Washington Street.

At 12.14am, John texted Jennifer McCabe ‘Where to?’  She replied with a text to an address on Fairview Road.  At 12.15, a vehicle that matches the one that Karen owned was seen on CCTV, driving past the Canton Town LIbrary.  I believe the address of the house is 34 Fairview Road and that the couple were headed to an ‘afterparty’ type thing.  I also believe the homeowner was a man named Brian Albert.  I have read online that Brian is a Boston Police Sergeant, part of the Fugitive Apprehension Team.  His wife is Nicole Albert, who is Jennifer McCabe’s sister.  


At 12.18am, John called Jennifer to ask for more specific directions to the house.  

Jennifer sent John a text at 12.31am saying ‘Hello.”

At 12.40am, Jennifer sent another text saying ‘Pull up behind me’.  I believe her vehicle was in the driveway and she was indicating that John and Karen should park behind her car.  She has said that she saw Karen’s black SUV move from where it had stopped near the driveway, to the far left side of the property near a flagpole and fire hydrant.

She sent another text at 12.45am saying ‘Hello.’  At this point, the black SUV drove away.

It seems like there was a fair bit of activity at the Fairview Road house early that morning.  Between 1.30am and 2am, another person got a ride to the house and “indicated that she thought she saw something, she described as a dark object, in the snow by the flagpole, but could not determine what it was.”

At 4.53am, Karen called Jennifer.  She said she was looking for John.  During the call, the woman told Karen that she last saw John at the Waterfall Bar and that she saw the couple leave together.

At 5am, Karen called another friend.  She said that John did not come home and she was worried.  According to the prosecution, Karen told her “I wonder if he’s dead. It’s snowing, he got hit by a plow.”

It seems that after this, Karen left her house to retrace her steps.  Her SUV can be seen on CCTV heading towards the Waterfall Bar at 5.11am.  It can be seen at various spots around town between then and around 5.30am.


At 5.30am, Karen arrived at the home of the sister of the Fairview Road resident.  They described her as ‘hysterical’ by that point.    One of the women drove Karen back to John’s house, while the other followed in a separate vehicle.    Karen asked one of the women ‘Could I have hit him?’ and then proceeded to mention that the taillight on her SUV had been cracked  

When they got back to John’s house, Karen showed the women the damage to the car.  They all then got into one car and went to look for John.  


It was apparently snowing heavily and there was poor visibility.  When they arrived back to the Fairview Road residence, Karen ‘immediately’ saw John laying in the snow.  The other women said they could not see him due to the poor conditions.

At 6.04am, a 911 call was made reporting that John had been found in the snow.  A police officer arrived and saw three women in the front yard.  Two of the women were doing CPR on John.    Just to note, the three women are identified in court documents as Karen Read, Jennifer McCabe and Kerry Roberts.  

The officer said that John was cold to the touch and was not breathing.  The conditions at the time have been described as ‘dark and blizzard like’.  

A Canton firefighter who responded to the 911 call said she witnessed Karen telling her friend repeatedly, “I hit him, I hit him, I hit him.”

When he was found, John was bleeding from his nose and mouth.  He had deep cuts on his arms, swollen eyes and a fractured skull. 

John was pronounced dead at 7.50am.

At 9.08am, Karen had her blood tested at Good Samaritan Medical Center.  A forensic toxicologist said it revealed her blood alcohol content was .07% – .08% and opined that around the time of 12:45 a.m., her BAC would have been between .13% and .29%.

Police arrived to the home of Karen’s parents at 4.30pm that day and they found her black Lexus SUV parked with the shattered tail light.

Her car was seized that day by Canton PD. 

Two pieces of red plastic tail light and one piece of clear plastic tail light were found by Massachusetts State Police Special Emergency Response Team members who dug through the snow. Prosecutors said the plastic was consistent with broken pieces of Karen’s vehicle.

John’s cellphone was analyzed by Massachusetts State Police. “Their forensic extraction of the call logs, voicemails and text messages between the victim and the defendant, including the date of Jan. 28-29, detailed strains within their relationship, the victim’s desire to end their relationship and the defendant’s description of their relationship with them and the two children together as “toxic.”


An autopsy was conducted on January 31, 2022 by the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner.

“The doctor opined that the extensive injuries to his head likely rendered Mr. O’Keefe incapacitated. The doctor further opined that upon viewing Mr. O’Keefe’s injuries and her examination of the body, she observed no signs of Mr. O’Keefe being involved in any type of physical altercation or fight.”

On February 1, 2022, crime scene technicians examined Karen’s car.  They confirmed that her backup camera was working and it alerted the techs when it was approaching a dummy.  A human hair was also found on the rear of the vehicle.

Police also reviewed CCTV footage on this day – from both bars that the couple visited.  

Around this time, Karen was charged with manslaughter, leaving the scene of a motor vehicle collision causing death, and motor vehicle homicide in connection with John’s death.

Karen’s attorney David Yanetti said in February 2022, that “manslaughter is a tremendous reach” in this case. He argued that she did not have any “criminal intent” and was left “devastated” with the incident:

“I will tell you that my client has no criminal intent. She loved this man. She is devastated at what happened and she is innocent and that will come out at trial.”

David argued that her bail should be reduced to $5,000 and gave reasoning that she had many medical issues including a brain tumor, MS and colitis.  

It was also said that Karen had dropped John off at the party and she did not go in due to her medical issues.  

The judge said that Karen had plenty of reason to flee and he rejected the plea.  She was released on $50,000 bail in February 2022.

She was indicted in June 2022 and the Superior Court then set bail at $100,000 which ended up being lowered to $75,000.

So that is basically the background to this story.  Now it gets even messier.

We have since learned some more info about John’s cause of death.  The ME listed his cause of death as blunt impact injuries of the head and hypothermia.   However, as of April 2023, the manner of his death could not be determined.  There are five possible manners of death – suicide, accident, homicide, natural and undetermined.

In April 2023, Karen’s defense team released information that they said ‘must reverse the trajectory of this case.’ You can read the documents here.

“An analysis of the complete forensic image of Jennifer McCabe’s cell phone by Computer Forensic Expert Richard Green establishes that Ms. McCabe, the government’s seminal witness, Googled, ‘hos (sic) long to die in cold’ at 2:27 a.m. on January 29, 2022, exactly two hours after O’Keefe was last seen walking towards the Albert Residence by Ms. Read,” Attorneys David Yannetti and Alan Jackson wrote in the 24-page motion.


The defense also allege that Jennifer deleted all communications that she had with Brian around the time of John’s death. 

This info was apparently not covered in the forensic report submitted by police.

This discovery, they argued, “uncovered significant steps to delete and tamper with evidence.”

The attorneys said that the Google search “exculpates Ms. Read and decisively implicates Jennifer McCabe and Brian Albert in the murder of John O’Keefe.

“In spite of the fact that O’Keefe was found dead on the front lawn of Boston Police Officer Brian Albert, a highly trained boxer and fighter with deep familial and personal ties to the Canton Police Department and the Massachusetts State Police, law enforcement has utterly failed to treat Mr. Albert (and his family members who were present on the night in question) as suspects,” the motion continues.

Along with the details of the Google search, the motion asks the court to issue summons to Brian Albert as well as phone carriers Verizon and AT&T for details call logs, location records and data for phones used by Brian and Jennifer.

Specifically, the motion requests “all cell phone(s) in the possession of and/or used by Brian Albert between January 28, 2022, and present” so that a defense expert can perform a forensic examination of communications on those phones from between Jan. 28, 2022, and Feb. 5, 2022.”

It further seeks “all information contained on any cloud-based accounts” used by those phones for the same date range as well as any access codes or passwords.

The targeted phones are a more limited request from another major defense filing on Aug. 12 that targeted phone data from every person who was at the gathering at 34 Fairview Rd., which was denied.

Karen’s attorneys made a statement at this time: 

“Today is a turning point for Karen. Finally, the truth has come out.  As we stress in the Motion, there is simply no innocent explanation for McCabe’s search at that time.”

“We’ve spent 15 months trying to uncover the truth,” defense attorney David Yannetti said. “We are not afraid of whatever evidence is unearthed from whatever source because, for 15 months, every stitch of evidence has been consistent with my client’s innocence.”

In early May 2023, some info about the prosecution’s rebuttal of the search was reported by wcvb.com:

Where the defense said its expert found a search for “Ho[w] long to die in the cold” was conducted by a sister-in-law of the homeowner at 2:27 a.m., the prosecution said evidence proves the iPhone was being used to browse a youth basketball website at the time.

Prosecutors did say that Read twice told the sister-in-law of the homeowner to search something like, “How long do you have to be left outside to die from hypothermia?” after they returned to Fairview Road.

Karen’s attorneys used health and location data from John’s phone to try to prove that he did enter the Albert house on the night he died.   

They said the health data shows he was climbing stairs in the house between 12.21am and 12.24am.

Just to note, the house is two storey so there are stairs.  It also sold in April 2023 which is interesting.

The prosecution say this info is not accurate as John was using the phone to navigate to the house and that data shows he did not arrive until 12.24am.

The defense has also contested the findings of John’s autopsy.  They have said he suffered ‘numerous defensive wounds on his hands consistent with a brutal fight.’  They claim that John was likely beaten to death inside the house and his body was dumped outside.   They also claim that Brian Albert’s dog Chloe may have attacked John at one point, and that could account for some of the injuries.   The dog has been rehomed out of state since John’s death.  This apparently happened after the dog bit someone else, four months after John’s death.   The defense want to test the dog’s DNA against John’s autopsy samples.

The DA wrote in the autopsy report that there were ‘no signs of an altercation or a fight.’

Karen’s attorneys rebutted this.

“He looked like he had gone 10 rounds with Mike Tyson, as my colleague has once analogized,” Alan Jackson said.

“Of course there’s evidence that he was in a fight,” he continued. “The back of his hands, deeply bruised. Those are called defensive wounds; I don’t care what their medical examiner called it. Anybody who’s seen any sort of a fight, a street fight, knows that the back of the hands, the back of the arms get the brunt of the punches as you cover your face. Of course there were signs of a fight — not just a fight, a brutal fight.”


Many documents in this case are available on TBDailyNews.com:



We have also since learned some information about Karen’s behavior on the morning of John’s death.  Kayley (the niece) said that she was woken up by Karen at 4.30am.  Kayley said Karen was ‘screaming and acting frantic.’  Kayley told police that Karen changed her story several times.  “The defendant stating that she and the victim got into an argument and she dropped him off.”

Karen’s attorney David Yanetti spoke about this slightly differently.  “At 4:30 in the morning, my client is placing multiple calls to the victim — in this case her boyfriend — wondering where he is, why he hasn’t come home and getting annoyed with him because his niece of whom he was a guardian had to go to bed without saying good night to him.”

On Wednesday May 3, 2023, Karen’s attorneys accused the prosecution of withholding evidence from them.  They said they have been requesting access to John’s clothes, forensic evidence from the car and samples from his autopsy and they have been denied.  


They also said that Karen has ‘lost everything’.  She is no longer employed and she and her family are spending all their money on legal fees.  Her attorneys asked the judge to set a deadline to secure the evidence.  

“She’s hired private counsel from two coasts. She’s hired multiple experts at considerable costs and when I say considerable, I mean tens and tens of thousands of dollars,” said defense attorney David Yannetti. “And the meter is running with each passing court date. She can’t afford to scrimp on her defense because her life is at stake.”

The prosecution say that lab analysis it not yet complete on certain items, but they expect that to be finalized soon.

Madeline Jane Kingsbury, 26, went missing on March 31 and has not had any contact with friends or family since.  She went missing from Winona, Minnesota.

Madeline goes by Maddi and she is the mother to two children.  Her LinkedIn says that she works as a “Clinical Research Coordinator for Public Health, Infectious Disease, and Occupational Medicine research at Mayo Clinic with a demonstrated history of working in human subjects research. Currently coordinating Phase I/II clinical trials.”

Before that, she worked for Gundersen Health System in La Crosse, Wisconsin, as a patient services specialist and population health intern. She was working toward a master’s degree in public health from the University of Minnesota School of Public Health, according to her LinkedIn page.

You can view Madeline’s Facebook here.

Madeline’s daughter was 5 and her son was 2 at the time she vanished.  The father of the children is a man named Adam Fravel.

According to his LinkedIn, Adam is a“software engineer” who lives in Winona.  His page says he offers advertising and web media services on contract. On Facebook, he has posted some pics of his and Madeline’s kids; she and her mother liked some of his posts.


The day Madeline vanished was Friday, March 31, 2023.

This is a confirmed timeline of what happened that day.


Madeline and Adam left the house with the two children at around 8am.  They left in Madeline’s 2014 blue Chrysler Town and Country van and dropped the kids to daycare.   

Madeline (and I am assuming Adam) got home at around 8.15am.  Madeline was texting with her sister Megan at this time.

“[The text was] just laughing in response to a funny photo I had sent the night before from a trip she and I took to Rhode Island last summer. No one else heard from her after that,” Megan said.

Adam reportedly left home in the van at around 10am.  He told police that when he returned home later in the van, Madeline was not there.

Between 10am and 1.30pm, Police said a van matching Madeline’s was driven on County Road 12 and Highway 43 in Winona County and then southbound on Highway 43 through the eastern part of Fillmore County. Then the van traveled back toward Winona on Highway 43 and remained in the driveway of the home from 1:30 p.m. onward. Police did not say who was driving the van.

Madeline was due to work that morning at the Mayo Clinic and she did not show up.  She also did not pick up her children from daycare that afternoon.  

Her family tried to contact her throughout the day on Friday.  They were not able to get in touch with her and they said that was out of character.


“We realized that night [Friday] that no one had heard from her all day, which is highly unusual — so that’s when we started to have a growing concern,” Megan told FOX 9.

I believe police were called to the house that day and when they arrived, they found her cell phone, wallet with ID, and the jacket she was wearing earlier in the day. Police also searched the van but did not say if anything was found.


Madeline was officially reported missing the following day, April 1.  Friends and family began searching for her immediately. 

That day at 2.25pm, the Winona Police Department made an appeal for information in the case.


There is a really great instagram account that has saved a bunch of information on this case (thankfully) – the account is mamalouwhoo.

The following day, April 2, the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension issued an “endangered missing person” alert for Madeline and released her description as 5 feet, 4 inches tall, weighs 135 pounds and has brown hair and hazel eyes.


https://www.instagram.com/stories/highlights/18051628441408424/?hl=en

On Monday April 3, Winona Police gave more information.

“She was last seen at her home in Winona, MN. Kingsbury was supposed to show up for work that morning but didn’t. In addition, numerous calls and messages from friends and family went unanswered. Kingsbury was supposed to pick up her children from daycare that afternoon but didn’t show up or make other arrangements. All of this is extremely out of character for her.”


Police asked for residents in Winona and Fillmore Counties to check their properties and video cameras for any signs of Madeline’s van passing through or stopping. They also requested residents along Highway 43 to check for any signs of disturbance or other suspicious activities between 8 a.m. on March 31 and 4 p.m. on April 1.

On April 4, Madeline’s children were taken into the care of social services.  They were taken into care on a 72 hour hold after it was determined that Adam did not have custodial rights to the children.

Police held another press conference on April 5.  They said Madeline’s disappearance was “involuntary” and “suspicious.” They also said there is no evidence that Madeline left the home on foot or that she left in another vehicle.  

They outlined info about the search to that date – they had conducted foot and vehicle searches, as well as aerial searches and had also looked at nearby waterways.  

They also appealed for public help:

We are asking that you search your acreage, wooded property, outbuildings, vehicles and trails for anything suspicious that may help find Madeline.

A large scale two-day search was planned for April 7 and 8.


On April 7, volunteers arrived at a local school and they were bussed to designated search areas where they canvassed the areas for four hours.  Volunteers walked spread out in farm fields and along roads.

Three hours after the mass search began, authorities gave a press conference on the progress of the investigation but did not provide many details since it’s an ongoing investigation. 


A second group of volunteers started searching at 4pm and the same happened the following day.

After the second day of searching wrapped up, police announced there would be no additional mass searches due to the large amount of ground that was covered in the previous days.  2,600 volunteers had covered a lot of ground. Police said they would now focus their efforts on targeted search areas.

“The search for Maddi is not ending and neither is the investigation into her disappearance. As we develop new leads and new search areas, teams of law enforcement officers will do targeted searches…. We are not giving up and we want to thank everyone for their continued support for Maddi and her family.”

A petition was filed in court on April 6 regarding Adam and his care of the children.  The documents allege that Adam and his family did not cooperate with officials and refused to permit social workers to meet with the kids.  When he finally gave in and handed over the children, he wouldn’t grab any belongings for them, meaning they left home with only the clothes they had on. 

On Wednesday April 12, police released another statement.  They said they remained extremely concerned for her safety.

“We have had two goals since we learned Maddi was missing: bring her home and if warranted, hold accountable the person or persons responsible for her disappearance. Releasing certain information about the investigation would jeopardize our availability to achieve these goals. We understand just how much the community wants answers and we are asking everyone to be patient as the investigative process unfolds. We remain confident we will find Maddi and bring her home to her family,” the statement reads in part. 


During this week, over 100 law enforcement officers searched specific areas based on data and tips.

They also confirmed that the van had been taken for forensic testing but would not confirm if/what had been found.

Adam (the father of Madeline’s kids) made a statement on April 12:

“Over the course of the last 12 days my family and I have been subject to a myriad of accusations regarding the disappearance of the mother of my children, Maddi Kingsbury. During these last 12 days I have cooperated with law enforcement at every turn, including sitting down for multiple interviews with Winona County law enforcement. I did not have anything to do with Maddi’s disappearance. I want the mother of my 5-year-old and 2-year-old to be found and brought home safely. I want that more than anything. Law enforcement advised me on April 2nd that they would not recommend that I attend the press conferences or that I assist in the searches due to safety concerns. However, my non-attendance and silence has been inferred by many as a sign of apathy, or worse. That could not be further from the truth. I want Maddi home and for her to be able to be with our two children. God Bless the Kingsbury family and please bring her home safely.”


Madeline’s family also made a statement:

“Nothing in life prepares you for this. The disappearance of our daughter and sister has been a walking nightmare with no respite. In the days and nights since Madeline disappeared, the immediate family and extended family have, collectively and individually, been experiencing emotions and trials that someone who has never been suddenly thrust into this horrific situation could ever imagine. 

“Eating is a mechanical act we force ourselves to do in order to keep our strength up so we can continue to advocate and search for Madeline. Sleep, if it comes, is fitful and fleeting. I have to think that the only thing that could come close to what we experience is the stress of combat, day after awful day. Initially, we were so overwrought that we couldn’t bear to look at each other but couldn’t bear to look away. There were no words we could say to comfort each other and we felt alone and frantic. In the days since the family has circled the wagons and gathered from near and across the world. We will find Madeline. This is our mission and we will not falter. 


“We’re private people finding ourselves thrust into the national limelight at the most traumatic time in our lives. We don’t seek to draw attention to ourselves but, of course, we want everyone everywhere to know about Madeline so we can reunite her with her children.”

“From time to time and as we see the need we use social media to encourage and inform the large groups of volunteers helping us search for Madeline. We’re overwhelmed by the dedication and tangible expressions of love demonstrated by the huge circle of warriors she unknowingly gathered around her – her sorority sisters, coworkers at Mayo Clinic and other places, fellow students from her days at Winona State, other moms and her many, many friends, acquaintances and people whose lives she’s touched. 

“We will continue to search for Madeline. We will not give up and our family will come out the other side of this forever changed but forever grateful for the tireless dedication of so many helpers- friends and relatives, people in law enforcement, other first responders, social workers, case workers, legal professionals, child advocates and many, many more.”

Megan, Madeline’s sister, told FOX 9 how special her sister was.

“Maddi is very bright, kind, hard-working, and giving. She is a wonderful mother to her two children. She never judges me or anyone else, accepts people for who they are,” she said.

Also on April 12, a judge made the decision that the children would remain in the care of Winona County Health and Human Services.  “The children shall remain in their current placement at this time as it is in their best interest,” the order reads in part.


The searches still continued for Madeline.  On April 14, K9s and dive teams were looking for her.  

20 firefighters also searched for her.  The Pepin County Sheriff office also utilised their drone team in the search.  

Specialised dive rescue teams participated on April 15.  Winona County Emergency Management asked again for the public’s assistance:

“We encourage the public to continue checking your properties and being alert when out hiking, hunting, and fishing.” 

Police said on April 17:

 “The investigation is active and ongoing. We are not prepared to identify a suspect or person of interest at this time. We are continuing to follow several paths of inquiry as we work to determine what happened to Maddi, and if warranted, hold accountable the person or persons responsible for her disappearance.”

People released an article around this time that spoke about the situation between Madeline and Adam.

Megan spoke to the media and said that Madeline and Adam were no longer romantically together.  According to this article, Madeline was looking for another place to live and the two planned to stay in close proximity to co-parent together. 

The area being searched for Madeline became flooded on April 18.  Volunteers were asked to stay away as it was too dangerous.


A neighbor spoke to Fox9 and said that on the day Madeline vanished, her van had been backed into the driveway.  He said he had never seen the car parked in that position before.  By this point, police had placed cameras in the driveway of the home to monitor it. 

60 people showed up to search for Madeline on April 23.  A facebook post was made after the search “We were able to cover way more ground than expected because of all the amazing humans who showed up. We appreciate each and every one of you.” 

n April 26, police again asked property owners to keep an eye out for Madeline.  They were asked to report old wells, homesteads, windmills or sinkholes.

Property owners were asked to display a blue checkmark in a prominent place if they consented to having their land searched.  After the property has been searched, volunteers or the homeowner would then place a blue ribbon around the mailbox indicating to others the property has already been checked.

Since 2008, around THIRTY bodies have been pulled from Lady Bird Lake in Austin, Texas.  28 of those bodies have been recovered since 2014.  This seemingly incredible number has led people to question if all these deaths were really accidental or if there is something more going on.

We will start with some background into the lake.  It is known as Lady Bird Lake (many people refer to it as Town Lake).  I have read some comments that say it is actually a river and not a lake, wikipedia says it’s a ‘river like reservoir’.  The lake/river is on the Colorado River in Austin, Texas.

The reservoir was created in 1960 to act as a cooling pond for a new city power plant.  It was named after the former First Lady of the US, Lady Bird Johnson.   

The lake has a surface area of 416 acres or 168 hectares.  It is now used for recreation and flood control.  

Motorized watercraft use is prohibited on the lake, so it’s mainly used for paddleboarding, kayaking, canoes.  The lake is said to be calm and is popular for many rowing teams to use.  

I have read some comments that say the lake is quite polluted and that is why swimming is not allowed, but apparently that is a rumor.  Swimming is prohibited due to many drownings as well as debris in the water from bridges and dams.  Swimming has been banned since 1964 and the fine can be up to $500.


In 2019, a toxic blue-green algae was found in the lake and up to five dogs were killed because of it.  

A ban on the consumption of fish caught in the lake was issued by the City of Austin in 1990, as a result of excessively high levels of chlordane found in the fish.  The use of chlordane as a pesticide was banned in the United States in 1988, the chemical sticks strongly to soil particles and can continue to pollute groundwater for years after its application. The ban on the consumption of fish caught in the lake was finally lifted in 1999.


Another area we will discuss in this episode is Rainey Street:

Rainey Street is a vibrant area in Austin known for its night life and boasts an array of bars, food trucks and restaurants.


We will now go through all the bodies that have been found to date in the lake.  This interactive map shows where all the bodies have been found. There is also a Facebook group that has lots of comprehensive info.

In June 2008, a decomposed body was pulled from the lake.  This info is from a now archived article from KXAN:

KXAN Austin News was first on the scene Sunday morning as firefighters pulled a dead body out of Lady Bird Lake, near the Holiday Inn by Interstate 35.


Around 6:30 a.m., police got a call from two fisherman who found a badly decomposed body on the lake.

Officials said the body was so badly decomposed that they are unable to determine the sex or age at this moment. The body has since been taken to the Travis County Medical Examiner’s office for an autopsy.

Homicide detectives are investigating and questioning people in the area.

This body was identified as Nazima Habibul, aged 26.  She was a preschool teacher who left behind a 2 y/o daughter.  She had apparently vanished after telling family she was going to the grocery store.

I haven’t been able to find much more on Nazima and what her confirmed COD was.

You can view Nazima’s obituary here.

The next death is that of Riad Hamad.  Riad was a school teacher and peace activist who was reported missing by his family on Monday April 14, 2008.

His car was found in a lot on the south side of Lady Bird Lake. 

On Wednesday April 16, 2008, Riad’s body was found floating in the lake.  His eyes had been covered with duct tape, his legs and hands had also been found.  


According to a report that day by KXAN-TV news, “Park-goers who saw the body said the death did not look accidental. They said the man’s face was wrapped with duct tape, and his arms appeared to be tied in front of his body.”

On Thursday, April 17, APD released a statement saying, “The bindings of his hands and legs and placement of the tape were consistent with Hamad having done this to himself.” Sgt Joe Chacon told the Chronicle that additional evidence – including a security videotape of the parking area where Hamad’s car was found and statements from persons who knew him that “he had been experiencing suicidal thoughts” – also support a finding of suicide but that police are waiting for completion of the entire investigation, including the full autopsy and toxicology report, which will take several weeks. “For all intents and purposes, as far as we know right now,” Chacon said this week, “this was a suicide.”


On January 14, 2012, another body was found in the lake.  

A body was found in Lady Bird Lake this afternoon, just downstream from Barton Springs. APD’s homicide unit was at the scene investigating. 


That is all the info we have about this death as the KVUE article has been archived.

Cole Christianson (21) was from Anchorage, Alaska and he was found dead on October 13, 2012.

Just to note, Cole wasn’t actually found in Lady Bird Lake but he was found in a creek that runs off it -Shoal Creek.  

We have included his death to the close proximity in water that he was found in. 


This is from his obituary.  I found it interesting that he was clearly very proficient in water. 

Cole Christianson passed away on Saturday, October 13, 2012 in Austin, Texas. He passed away unexpectedly while on vacation.

He spent countless nights tearing apart jet skis, motorcycles, and any other toys he thought he could customize. Cole truly lived life to the fullest. There was nothing that could stop him from doing something he loved; Cole was the definition of a daredevil. Cole loved his family and friends more than anything else. He surrounded himself with amazing people who had the same values as he did. Cole spent much of his time with his family and friends at his cabin on Big Lake. Big Lake was his favorite place to be. He loved sitting by the campfire, wakeboarding, jet skiing, and anything that had to do with water.


There is a bit of a jump after this to 2014.  The next death was in May 2014 when a man died after falling from his paddleboard.  This was a witnessed death and doesn’t seem suspicious.

On February 10, 2014, the body of Eleno Valle was pulled from the lake.  Eleno had been reported missing on February 7.  Eleno had told his roommate Nathan Jebe that he was going for a walk on February 6.  He wasn’t too concerned when Eleno did not return as he thought Eleno might be out with friends.

Nathan became worried the next day when Eleno’s sister asked if he had been seen.  

Eleno had been taking medication for depression and his family were worried at the time that he had stopped taking it.  

Police said at the time that they were investigating Eleno’s death as a suicide.

On October 13, 2014, the body of Eron David Wrublik was found floating in Lady Bird Lake.  Eron had gone missing on Thursday October 9.  He had been out with friends in Austin and had called an Uber to get him home to Rainey Street.  The driver dropped him instead off near a Holiday Inn on Interstate 35 at around 2.30am on Friday October 10. 

Police stated that they believe Eron was walking close to the water and somehow fell in.  

Police eventually determined that Eron’s cause of death was accidental drowning.

Julio Santos III (22) was found dead in Lady Bird Lake on June 7, 2015.  

Julio was last seen at a dance club called Barbarella on Friday June 5, at around 2.30am.  

This info is from the police press release:
Santos was reported as a Missing Person on Friday, June 5, 2015 at 5:58 p.m. and was last seen at E. 6th St. and Red River St. at approximately 2:30 a.m. on Friday, June 5, 2015. The Medical Examiner’s office reported no suspicious trauma to the body. Austin Police are continuing to investigate this death as not suspicious.



The next death was July 22, 2015 – Ramona DeLopez was found in Lady Bird Lake.  She was 84 years old.  I believe this one is definitely an accidental drowning.

On September 17, 2015, another body was found.  The body was found at around 1pm.  This info is from KVUE:


Police said Thursday afternoon the death does not appear to be suspicious, and have not determined whether it is a man or woman.

A later article by Fox 7 Austin said this decedent was male, but I haven’t been able to find a name.

On October 24, 2015, a man jumped from a bridge into Lady Bird Lake after he crashed his car.  Another explainable death.

On November 29, 2015, Santiago Gonzalez-Becerra (23) was pulled from the lake.  He had been missing for a few days.  At the time, Spectrum Local News reported:

The Medical Examiner’s office reported no suspicious trauma to the body. The cause of death has not yet been determined.

On February 14, 2016, the body of a male in his 50s was pulled from the lake.  

Police said there were no obvious signs of trauma.

There is no other public info about this death.

On February 29, 2016, the body of a woman in her 60’s was pulled from the lake. 

According to an article by Fox 7 Austin, her death was being treated as a homicide. 

“Since it’s located in a body of water and we don’t know what occurred, we’re going to handle it as suspicious until we determine otherwise,” says Cpl. Angel Polansky, Austin Police Dept.


The title of this article was : Five bodies pulled from Lady Bird Lake in six months

Another man was found dead in the lake on December 28, 2016.  No info is known about this man except that he was thought to be in his 40’s and he was found in water near Interstate-35 bridge and the Holiday Inn.

This location is interesting as it is the same location that Eron was last seen at. 

On June 14, 2018, a man was pulled dead from the lake.

This info is from patch.com:

A passerby spotted the clothed body lying face down in the water before alerting police. The site of the grisly find is near the 1400 Nash Hernandez SR. Road just before 9:20 a.m., officials said. Police also have not disclosed the gender of the deceased.

At the time, police said the death was not considered suspicious.

On August 15, 2018, a man in his 40’s was pulled dead from the water.  

APD said evidence from the scene did not indicate that the death was suspicious or “of a homicidal nature.”

On October 11, 2018, the body of Christopher White (25) was pulled from Lady Bird Lake.  Christopher was from Minnesota and had been visiting Austin to attend the Austin City Limits Music Festival with friends.

This info about his disappearance and death is from Fox10 Phoenix:

The group attended the music festival on Friday and returned to their rental home near the Colorado River Friday night. Friends reported they last saw Christopher between 5 a.m. and 6 a.m. Saturday morning and that he mentioned he might want to go down to the dock, but none of them actually saw him leave the home. He was reportedly intoxicated.

Friends realized Christopher was missing when they woke up Saturday morning and reported him missing later that day.  He had left his shoes, phone and wallet behind.  

When Christopher was found, authorities said there was no evidence of foul play.  

Chris’ cause of death was eventually determined to be accidental drowning.  Toxicology testing on Chris’ blood showed traces of ethanol, cocaine and one of its metabolites, cocaethylene (a compound formed in the body when both cocaine and ethanol are present), and methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) and its metabolite.


Martin Gutierrez (25) went missing on Rainey St in Austin on November 19, 2018.

He had been out with friends at a bar called Alibi and he was last seen by them at 1am, when he said he was going to get a ride with a friend.     


Martin’s body was found in Lady Bird Lake on November 26, 2018.

Martin’s brother made a statement at the time:

“Martin was the brother I could go to for everything and now he’s gone. I am lost with no idea what direction to go from here. My family, friends, and community have come together in a way I never believed was possible in an effort to help me find him,” Mitchell wrote. “This world will always and forever be significantly less happy without Martin Gutierrez.”

Martin’s cause of death was determined after autopsy to be accidental drowning.  According to toxicology reports, he was intoxicated when he died of accidental drowning, but no illicit or prescription drugs were found in his system.

Austin police confirmed they didn’t suspect foul play in Martin’s death.


On August 4, 2019, another body was pulled from the lake.

This is from the Austin police:

APD is currently investigating a deceased person located near 800 W Cesar Chavez in Lady Bird Lake. This is not being investigated as a suspicious death and PIO is not responding.

On September 28, 2019, a man that police said was in his 30’s was found dead in the lake.  This person was found in the lake near the Holiday Inn, near where Eron and the man from December 2016 were found.  

The body was found by kayakers who towed the man to shore.  

I believe this man was Jake Waltrip, who was actually 28 when he died.  

Some info about Jake:

Jake lived in Houston and Denton before moving to Orange County, CA for two years and working at Luma Prints.  In 2018 he moved back to Texas and started computer coding school at Austin Coding Academy and received his Full Stack Java Web Development certification this year.

After doing some contract work, he recently began working for Mathalicious – a website with real-world math lessons for middle and high school teachers to use in their classes.  He was very excited about this job and was very optimistic for his future.

Growing up he enjoyed riding/driving the golf cart and shooting targets out in the country at Grandma and Grandpa’s.  And shooting at the gun range with his dad and at Uncle Paul’s house with all the guys and some of the ladies.

As he grew older, he became very philosophical and greatly enjoyed reading and watching and discussing podcasts about life and what is true and important. 

He also loved being outdoors and running, riding his bike around the lake, kayaking and camping out in his tent and chilling in his hammock.


On May 24, 2021, Erik Manzanares-Medrano (26) was found dead in Lady Bird Lake.

There is not too much info on this death online, apart from the standard ‘not a suspicious death’ statement by police.

Rocael Rosario Lopez was last seen on New Year’s Day 2022 in the very early morning in Austin.

A friend made this post on Facebook:

HELP US FIND HIM!!

YALL MY COWORKER HAS BEEN MISSING SINCE THE EVENING OF DEC 31ST!!

LAST KNOWN PLACE WAS CELEBRATING NEW YEARS IN DOWNTOWN AUSTIN

HIS NAME IS Rocael rosario López

HIS FAMILY & OUR STAFF ARE WORRIED BOUT HIM..

HIS CELL PHONE IS OFF, NO CREDIT CARDS HAVE BEEN USED & HE HAS NOT BEEN ACTIVE ON ANY SOCIAL MEDIA..

THERE IS A MISSING PERSON OUT ON HIM WITH APD ALREADY, BUT PLEASE SHARE THIS AROUND ANYWAYS

PLEASE CONTACT HIS FAMILY IF THERE IS ANY INFORMATION ON HIM @ +15126964386

OR CALL APD

Rocael’s body was pulled from the lake on January 6, 2022.

Another body was found on July 14, 2022.  

This info is from Fox 44:

ATCEMS tweeted at 2:46 p.m. medics went to check on someone floating in the water, and the person was “possibly deceased.” At 3:19 p.m., ATCEMS tweeted an update confirming the person was dead.

As of ATCEMS’ most recent update, crews were “working on recovery and relocation of the victim back to shore.”

The Austin Police Department said its homicide division is responding to the scene, and the body could have been in the lake for “a couple days.”

The next body was found on December 10, 2022.

Deceased person 517-1005 S Pleasant Valley (21:44) #ATCEMSMedics have obtained a deceased on-scene pronouncement of an adult that was found in the lake by 911 caller. #ATCEMS will be clearing the scene shortly. Scene turned over to law enforcement. No further info available.

Another one with no info, but the investigating officer was from the homicide department. 

I feel at this point, this is when the deaths seem to start ramping up and increasing.

A body was found in the lake on Christmas Day, 2022.

Law enforcement said it was too early to identify the person or determine what caused their death.  There doesn’t seem to have been any public updates since.

Another body was found three days later, on December 28, 2022.

This info is from KXAN:

Officials said 911 received a call at 2:08 p.m. from a person reporting there was a body in the water.

EMS later said an adult was pronounced dead at 2:33 p.m.

Between January to April 2023, four bodies have been pulled from Lady Bird Lake.

Jason John (30) was reported missing on February 5, 2023.  He was last seen walking on Rainey Street.  He had previously been on a night out with friends.  Jason could be seen on CCTV for 10 minutes before he dropped out of sight, due to the lack of cameras in the area.  His body was found on February 13.  Police said that Jason had no visible injuries on him when he was recovered.  

Jason’s body was found in the same area where Martin Gutierrez was found.  


Clifton Axtel (40) went missing on February 25, 2023.  His body was found on March 5.

LATE FINAL Water Rescue at 700-800 W RIVERSIDE DR (09:54). #ATCEMS & @austinfireinfo were called for a reported body in the water on Lady Bird Lake. Rescue crews located the victim & obtained a Deceased on Scene pronouncement of an adult patient. No other information available.

Some info about Clifton from his obituary:

Clifton Axtell, a beautiful, bright ball of energy, came into this world on September 29th, 1982 in Plano, Texas. He was a son, brother, husband, father, nephew, uncle and grandson. Cliff loved his family deeply. He departed this earth on March 5th, 2023 and is profoundly missed by all who love him.

Cliff married Megan McKnight on March 5th, 2016. He worked as a land specialist for Veritas Commercial Properties in Austin, Texas where he was known for his innovative strategies in commercial real estate. Cliff was in his senior year at Harvard Extension School, where he made the Dean’s list each semester. He attended Southwest Bible Church and was active in Celebrate Recovery where he led worship for three years.

Jonathan Honey (33) was last seen at a taco food truck at 2am on Friday March 31, 2023.  

After Jonathan was found deceased on April 1, 2023, the family of Jason John spoke out about the similarities between the cases.  Jason’s death had been determined to be an accidental drowning at this point and his family did not agree.

“We definitely don’t agree with that,” said Jason John’s mother Elsie John. “Jason was 30. Jonathan Honey was 33. 2 in the morning. Rainey Street. So there were some similarities in the case.”

“It is very, very concerning,” said SafeHorns president Joell McNew.

McNew says she’s worried about University of Texas students who go out on Rainey Street.

“I know that there have been some comments on social media that it’s just alcohol related,” said McNew. “And I believe it’s definitely more than that.

Jonathan’s family wrote in his obituary that his death was a tragic accident.  Jonathan Seth Honey passed away at the age of 33 due to a tragic accident on 31 March 2023. He was born at Griffiss AFB NY to Dr. David A. Honey and Cynthia N. Yellen on 23 February 1990. After spending his early years in Rome NY, Jonathan and his family moved to Hanscom AFB MA and then to Fairfax VA in 1997. During adulthood, Jonathan remained in the Northern Virginia area.

After Jonathon was found Austin PD released this statement:

“The Austin Police Department is aware of speculations regarding the recent drownings in Lady Bird Lake. Although these cases are still under investigation and evidence is being analyzed, at this time, there is no evidence in any of these cases to support allegations of foul play. While each incident has occurred at the lake, the circumstances, exact locations, and demographics surrounding these cases vary. Our investigators approach every case with an open mind and objectively examine all available evidence.

We work closely with the Travis County Medical Examiner’s Office, which conducts a parallel investigation into all deaths. The Medical Examiner performs autopsies in each of these types of death investigations. The results of these autopsies have not revealed any trauma to the bodies nor indication of foul play.

One common theme of the drownings in Austin this year is the combination of alcohol and easy access to Lady Bird Lake, which has numerous access points. Many of the access points can be challenging to see at night. The parks in which most of these drownings have occurred are park areas that close at 10:00 pm and occur after the park closes. We advise the public to follow the rules on park closures.”

Just a few days ago, on April 15, Christopher Hays-Clark was pulled dead from Lady Bird Lake.  This info is from Fox 7 Austin:

On Saturday, April 15, around 1:20 p.m., the Austin Police Department responded to the Longhorn Dam, which is the east side of Lady Bird Lake, not near the Rainey Street Entertainment District.

“Multiple people called 911 and said that a suspect appeared to be deceased and was in the water on this end of the lake,” Austin Police Department Officer Michael Bullock said.

Police performed a water rescue and found 30-year-old John Christopher Hays-Clark. Investigators said they don’t suspect foul play.

Elizabeth Ann Smart was born on November 3, 1987 in Salt Lake City, Utah.  Her parents are Edward and Lois Smart.  Elizabeth has four brothers and one sister – their names are Mary Katherine, William, Edward, Charles and Andrew.  The family are part of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The day before ElizABETH abduction was June 4, 2002.  The Smart family did not get home until late that evening as they had attended the Bryant Middle School awards function.  Elizabeth got awards in physical fitness and academics.

In the early hours of June 5, 2002, Elizabeth and Mary Katherine were asleep in a bedroom of the Smart home.  A man entered the house by cutting a window screen near the back door.  Mary Katherine heard the man threaten Elizabeth if she didn’t stay quiet.  Mary Katherine pretended to be asleep through the abduction. Elizabeth was 14 at the time she was abducted and Mary Katherine was 9.

Mary Katherine told police that the abductor was a white man who was around the same height as her brother Charles – 5’8.  She said he was 30-40 years old, was wearing light colored clothes and a golf hat.  She said he had dark hair on his head, as well as dark hair on his arms and hands.

Mary Katherine said she thought the man had a gun. 

Elizabeth said ‘ouch’ at one point after she stubbed her toe.  The abductor said something along the lines of ‘You better be quiet, and I won’t hurt you.’ 

She said she thought she heard Elizabeth ask ‘Why are you doing this?’ and the man possibly replied ‘for ransom.’

Mary Katherine said the abductor was polite, calm and nicely dressed.  She also said she thought his voice sounded familiar but she could not recall where she had heard it before.

After Elizabeth and the abductor left the room, Mary Katherine ran to tell her parents what had happened.  She saw then that Elizabeth and the man were still in the house, outside the bedroom of her brothers.  She crept quietly back into her bed where she hid for up to two hours.  Just before 4am, Mary Katherine went and told her parents what had happened.  They at first did not believe her, until they found the window screen that had been cut.  


Lois and Ed Smart gave an interview about the circumstances to Katie Couric.

Couric: “Tell me what happened. You all were sleeping. And you were awakened by Mary Catherine.”


Lois Smart: “Yes. She came in and said, ‘Elizabeth’s gone.”

Couric: “Was she frantic?”

Lois Smart: “She was frightened. She had a blanket. She was—”

Ed Smart: “Almost hiding behind the blanket.”

Lois Smart: “As she came in. And she said, ‘Elizabeth’s gone. A man took her with a gun.’ And of course being awoken to that, it was like, this is a bad dream.”

Couric: “Because you thought, well, maybe Elizabeth went to sleep on the sofa. Mary Katherine was bugging her or whatever—”

Lois Smart: “Yeah, taking the blankets or kicking or something. And so we weren’t alarmed. Within the next three or four minutes, it seemed like an eternity, while we were going around the house and checking everything.”

Ed Smart: “Checking each of the rooms and as you went from one room, didn’t find her, and it was — the adrenaline starts building to a point where you just, you know, is this really possible?”

Couric: “You were completely panic stricken.”

Lois Smart: “Yes. And when he came upstairs and says she’s not on the sofa, and I went flying down and turned on every light. And I saw that she wasn’t there either. As my eyes panned the room, I saw this cut screen. And I knew.”

Lois Smart: “I was hysterical, and I was— we were yelling. I was yelling for Ed, ‘Call the police! Call the police!’ It’s a horrible, horrible feeling.”


Couric: “The police came immediately. And Ed, in the book, you write, ‘I remember feeling as if the police didn’t have control over the situation. It was as if they were waiting for something to happen or somebody to come and tell them what to do. I was bothered that they weren’t out looking for my daughter.’”

Ed Smart: “I don’t know that police handled kidnappings every day. I don’t think it’s— I hope it’s not a common occurrence.”

Elizabeth has since spoken out about how she was kidnapped.  This info is from People:

“He placed his hand on my chest and then put the knife up to my neck. He told me to get up quietly and if I didn’t then he would kill me and my family.”

He was whispering, but it was still loud enough it could wake someone. He was dressed in sweats, sweatshirt, stocking cap, tennis shoes.”

On June 6, 2002, Ed and Lois went on television and pleaded for the kidnapper to return Elizabeth. 

“If you can hear me, Elizabeth is the sweetest girl. She’s an angel,” her father, Ed Smart, told reporters late Wednesday. “Please let her go. Please. I mean, she doesn’t do anything to anyone, and there’s no reason that you should have her.”

“Elizabeth, if you’re out there, we’re doing everything we possibly can to help you. We love you. We want you to come home safely to us.”


A massive search was undertaken for Elizabeth, with up to 2,000 volunteers involved.  Authorities also used search dogs and planes.  

There was little usable evidence found at the Smart home, no fingerprints or DNA of the abductor were found.  They also searched the house with bloodhounds and found nothing.

At the time, obviously, the abductor’s identity was unknown.  We know now that he is Brian David Mitchell.  Before we get into what Elizabeth endured while she was kidnapped, we will go into his background.

Brian David Mitchell was born on October 18, 1953, making him 48 at the time of the abduction.  He was born in Salt Lake City and was the third of six children born into a Mormon family.  His mother was a teacher and his father was a social worker.  

As part of his sex education, Brian’s father would show him explicit photos.  To teach him independence,  his father would drop him to parts of the city that he wasn’t familiar with and would leave him to find his own way home.

Brian’s trouble seemed to start around age 16, when he exposed himself to a child and was sent to juvenile hall.  He got married at age 19, to a 16 year old female named Karen Minor.  They had two children together and ended up getting divorced.  Karen was awarded custody of both children.  Brian ended up taking the children illegally to New Hampshire for a period of time.

He stayed in New Hampshire for two years and he joined a Hare Krishna commune.  

He was known to abuse drugs and alcohol.

Brian returned to Salt Lake City and he got married to a woman named Debbie.  They had two children together.  (Debbie had three children from a previous marriage).  They ended up divorcing in 1984 after Debbie alleged that Brian had been abusive during their marriage.  She also claimed that Brian had sexually abused their 3 y/o son.  This could not be medically proven but all future visitation with Brian’s children was supervised by the Division of Child and Family Services.  One of Debbie’s daughters from her first marriage would later claim that Brian sexually abused her for four years.

On the day that Brian and Debbi’s divorce was finalized, he married a woman named Wanda Elaine Barzee.  Wanda was born in Salt Lake City on November 6, 1945.  Wanda was 40 at the time and had six children from a previous marriage.


Wanda’s relationship with her kids was troubled.  One daughter described her as a ‘monster’ and said that Wanda once fed her the family’s pet rabbit for dinner.

Wanda and Brian were actively involved in the LDS church.  Brian started going by the name Immanuel and he claimed to be a prophet from God who experienced visions.  Wanda started using the name Hephzibah.  The couple would end up being excommunicated from the church for being too extreme.

They started panhandling and preaching in downtown Salt Lake City.  Brian started dressing like Jesus, in white robes and he grew a beard.


So after Brian kidnapped Elizabeth, he took her into the woods just outside of Salt Lake City where he had a camp set up.  Wanda was there waiting for them.  

Elizabeth said that Wanda ‘ eventually just proceeded to wash my feet and told me to change out of my pyjamas into a robe type of garment.  And when I refused, she said if I didn’t, she would have Brian come rip my pyjamas off.  I put the robe on.  He came and performed a ceremony, which was to marry me to him.  After that, he proceeded to rape me.’  

Brian also told Elizabeth that he was an angel and a Davidic King who would ‘emerge in seven years, be stoned by a mob, lie dead in the streets for three days, and then rise up and kill the Antichrist.’  

He told Elizabeth that she was the first of many virgin brides that he was going to kidnap.  Each bride was to accompany him as he battled the Antichrist.

Brian shackled Elizabeth to a tree with a metal cable.  This gave her limited mobility outside of the tent that she occupied.  Brian told Elizabeth she had to take a new name, and she chose Esther, after Esther in the Old Testament.  Brian also sometimes called her Shearjashub.


Shearjashub (שאר ישוב‎ Šə’ār-yāšūḇ) is possibly the first-mentioned son of Isaiah according to Isaiah 7:3. His name means “the remnant shall return” and was prophetic; offering hope to the people of Israel, that although they were going to be sent into exile, and their temple destroyed, God remained faithful and would deliver “a remnant” from Babylon and bring them back to their land.

Another name that Brian called Elizabeth was Augustine.

Brian repeatedly raped Elizabeth, sometimes up to four times per day.  He also forced her to look at pornographic magazines and regularly threatened to kill her.  He made her drink alcohol and take drugs to lower her resistance.  

Elizabeth has said that Brian starved her for days at a time.  She once tried to stop him raping her by biting him.   “He said if I did that, he would never have sex with me again and I would be the most miserable woman in the world,” she testified. “He said that but it didn’t stop him.”

Brian and Wanda used to take Elizabeth out in public while she was kidnapped.  They made her cover her face with a headscarf and face veil so that she would not be recognised.

Two months after they kidnapped Elizabeth, Wanda and Brian decided they wanted to leave Utah and take her to either Boston or New York City.

In order to research where they wanted to move to, Wanda and Brian took Elizabeth to the Salt Lake City Public Library.  

A patron at the library noticed the trip due to their unusual dress – full length robes and veils.  However, this person got a look at Elizabeth’s eyes and was convinced that she was the missing girl.  The police were called and Detective Jon Richey arrived at the library.  

When he got there, he said he thought the tip was a ‘long shot’.  He questioned Brian.  Brian said that the detective was unable to look under the veil and that the women were not able to speak in public due to their religious beliefs.  

The Detective offered for the girl to go into a bathroom to reveal her face privately.  “I upped the pressure, one notch at a time, and got the same matter-of-fact response that this was not going to happen,” Detective Richey testified. He said Brian remained “calm, assertive and very much the same throughout the confrontation.”

The detective said that he recognised the civil rights of the group and that he didn’t feel there was enough evidence to force the girl to unveil herself. 

“Had I more information, anything at all that led me to believe it was Elizabeth, [civil rights] wouldn’t matter. Her safety would be my only consideration. I would have taken off the veil.”

Brian told the detective that the girl was an 18 y/o relative. 

“She was taller than I am, and she appeared to be about 18,” Detective Richey said.


He also said he manipulated the situation so that the female had a chance to whisper in his ear, and she didn’t.  He said he expected a kidnapping victim would take advantage of such an opportunity.

Elizabeth later said: “I felt like hope was walking out the door. I was mad at myself that I didn’t say anything, mad at myself for not taking the chance. So close. I felt terrible that the detective hadn’t pushed harder. He just walked away.”

The detective left the trio alone after spending around 30 minutes with them.


Around the same time in 2002, an employee of Deseret News had a weird encounter with Brian David Mitchell.  Heidi Perry said she saw Brian taking down posters of Elizabeth that had been hanging in the lobby of the building.  

Brian told Heidi that Elizabeth “had been found, and the poster didn’t need to be up anymore,” she testified.

When Heidi told him she worked at the newspaper and would know if Elizabeth had been found, she said Brian replied that he read it in the “other newspaper.”

Brian’s demeanor was said to be “calm” as he kept tearing down the poster. When she ran upstairs to get help, he fled.

On July 24, 2002, Brian and Wanda attempted to abduct one of Elizabeth’s cousins.  It is believed that the cousin was 15, the same age as Elizabeth.

Elizabeth was forced to lead Brian and Wanda to the home of her cousin.  What they didn’t know is that the younger cousin had previously been sharing a room with her older sister, Jessica.  The house had been remodeled and the younger girl had moved to another room.  

Brian attempted to cut through the window.  Jessica woke up because a thin object sticking through her window blinds had knocked over a picture on the desk in front of the window. The father met his daughter in the hall as she ran from the bedroom. 

Jessica’s father Steven Wright called police and the FBI arrived to question him.  He said they accused him of staging the break-in.  “It was hell with the breaking in. It was hell with the cops accusing me. It was hell trying to find out who did this,” Steven Wright said.

Brian and Wanda also took Elizabeth to grocery stores and a restaurant but nobody took any notice.  She also attended a party in the fall of 2002 with them and she was actually photographed while there.  

In September 2002, Wanda and Brian left Salt Lake City with Elizabeth, and they moved to San Diego County in California.  They set up a camp in a dry creek bed in Lakeside.  They moved location frequently, often in the middle of the night.  In February 2003, Brian was arrested in El Cajon for breaking into a church.   He spent several days in jail over this incident.


In October 2002, Mary Katherine had a realization about where she had heard the abductor’s voice before.  She remembered that the Smart family had hired a man named Immanuel to work on the roof and rake leaves at the home. 

Ed and Lois eventually wrote a book about the abduction and they recalled some information about Mary Katherine’s sudden memory.  “(S)he told us that she’d been reading the ‘Guinness Book of World Records.’ She saw a photo of a very muscular woman, and something triggered her memory of who took her sister the morning of June 5. It’s strange, because Brian David Mitchell was a thin man.’


The police were skeptical of this information at first because Immanuel had only worked for the family for a short time, and a long time had elapsed since his voice was heard.  The family had a sketch artist draw Immanuel based on their descriptions.  The sketch was given to the media in February 2003 – it was shown on Larry King Live and AMW.  

Miraculously, the sketch was recognized by members of Brian’s family, who gave police current photos of him.  Those photos were also made public.

On March 12, 2003, Brian was spotted with a woman and a girl in Sandy, Utah, by two separate witnesses who had seen his photo on the news.  Sandy is just 15 miles from where Elizabeth was abducted from.  

The three people had been seen carrying bedrolls and bags and were walking down the street.  Officers went to the area and “located a male and two females at the side of the road. Sandy officers questioned the three and determined one of them was possibly Elizabeth Smart,” Sandy police said in a statement.

Elizabeth and Wanda had been wearing wigs and veils at the time.  

The three were taken to a police station where it was confirmed – the female found was Elizabeth Smart.  


Elizabeth’s family spoke about the moment the family was reunited.  “All of the children out there deserve to come back to theirparents the way Elizabeth has come back to us,” he said. “It is nothing but a miracle. I just held her, held her the whole way home. … I had to take a double-take and pull her back away from her and say, ‘Is it really you? ’

“Words cannot express how incredibly grateful we are,” said Elizabeth’s uncle, David. “Do miracles still exist? Our answer is yes.”

The Smart family said Elizabeth was sharp and healthy. During her reunion with her parents, she asked questions about her siblings and was shocked to hear that her younger brother had earned straight A’s on his last report card, according to family members who spoke to reporters tonight. They said police were amazed about the amount of information Elizabeth was giving them in their interview.

“What a great day it is for the city of Salt Lake,” said FBI Agent Chip Burress. “There are law enforcement officials up there [in the police station] with wide grins on their faces. I cannot tell you how many cases we’ve had where the end outcome was not this.”

“You know, we’ve been waiting for this day for a long time,” said neighbor Shelly Eugaphusa, who organized the balloon hanging. “We just wanted to celebrate. We’re so happy for their family. … We never gave up.”

When he was arrested, the court requested that Brian undergo a competency evaluation, based on his claims of being a religious prophet.

Brian was held at Utah State Hospital while this was undertaken.  Stephen Golding, a psychologist hired by the defense, distinguished between zealous belief and delusion, and concluded that Brian’s beliefs transcended zeal and were in fact delusional. It was his opinion that Brian was not competent to stand trial as a result of his delusions.

The court overruled this and found Brian to be competent in 2004.  


Plea negotiations between the defense and prosecution began.  Brian was willing to plead guilty to kidnapping and burglary for a 10-15 year sentence, on the condition that Elizabeth was not allowed to testify.  

The prosecution refused to drop sexual assault charges against Brian and no agreement was reached.

In February 2005, a psychologist named Jennifer Skeep interviewed Brian again.  She had previously interviewed and deemed him competent.  After the 2005 interview, Brian’s attorney filed a brief stating that he was no longer competent.  

Brian began acting out while in court, but jail staff said they observed no change in behavior.  This indicates that he was putting on a show for the court room.

Judge Judy Atherton agreed with the defense that Brian was showing signs of psychosis.  He was readmitted to Utah State Hospital on August 11, 2005 and he remained there until 2008.  During that time, no staff observed Brian being paranoid in a pathological sense. 

In February 2006, a bill went before Utah legislature that sought the right to forcibly medicate defendants to make sure they were competent to face trial.  Permission to forcibly medicate Wanda was also sought at this time.  In June 2006, a judge approved Wanda being medicated so that she could face trial.  

On December 18, 2006,  Brian was declared unfit yet again.  He had screamed at a judge during a hearing to ‘forsake these robes and kneel in the dust’.  

On December 12, 2008, it was reported that the decision was that Brian could not legally be forcibly medicated to restore his mental competency.  

The case was transferred to the Federal court on October 10, 2008.  The issue of Brian’s competency went on and on, through to December 2009.  One example of Brian’s behavior was that he burst out singing hymns in court.  

Elizabeth described Brian as “smart, articulate, evil, wicked, manipulative, sneaky, slimy, selfish, greedy, not spiritual, not religious, not close to God.’

More competency evaluations were conducted by professionals. One doctor said that Brian was fully aware of his actions and was attempting to deceive the court. Another doctor reviewed 210 sources and 57 different interviews involving Brian, Wanda, his family and Elizabeth. One expert said that Brian was competent to stand trial and diagnosed him with non-exclusive pedophilia, antisocial personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorder, malingering and alcohol abuse in a controlled environment.

Brian was finally deemed competent to stand trial on March 1, 2010.  

Wanda eventually pleaded guilty and was sentenced to concurrent terms of 15 years in state and federal prison. In 2016, Wanda’s federal imprisonment was terminated and she was transferred from the Federal Medical Center, Carswell in Fort Worth, Texas, to the Utah State Prison in Draper, Utah, to begin serving her state prison sentence. She was released in September 2018 at age 72, which Elizabeth protested.

“May we all remain vigilant in watching over our families, friends, and community from anyone who would seek to hurt or take advantage. I truly believe life is meant to be happy and beautiful, and no matter what happens that will remain my goal for me and for my family,” she wrote.

“I do believe she’s a threat. For me, I know the depth of her depravity.”

Conditions of Wanda’s release included mental health treatment and an order to not contact any of the Smart family.  She voluntarily agreed to not goto any locations that the Smart family might have frequented. 

Three months after Wanda’s release, it was revealed that she was living near a Salt Lake City elementary school.  There were apparently no restrictions to how close she could live to a school, though Utah’s state rules disallowed her from going on school property.


Brian’s trial finally began on November 8, 2010.  The defense acknowledged that Brian was responsible for the crimes but that he was legally insane when he committed them.  They argued that he should be found not guilty by reason of insanity.  

On December 11, 2010, the jury rejected the insanity story and found him guilty of kidnapping and transporting a minor across state lines with the intent to engage in sexual activity.  

US District Judge Dale A Kimball sentenced Brian to live in prison without the possibility of parole.  He is serving his sentence at US Penitentiary, Terre Haute, in Indiana. 


Elizabeth has been a vocal supporter of sexual predator legislation and the AMBER Alert system since her abduction.

In May 2008, she traveled to Washington DC where she presented a book titled ‘You’re Not Alone’.  It covered her story, as well as the stories of four other recovered young adults.  The book was published by the US Department of Justice.

In 2009, Elizabeth spoke at the 2009 Women’s Conference in California, hosted by Maria Shriver.  The event was focused on how to overcome obstacles in life.  

Elizabeth left Salt Lake City in 2009 to serve as a church missionary in Paris.  

In 2011, Elizabeth founded the Elizabeth Smart Foundation,  which aims to bring hope and end the victimization and exploitation of sexual assault through prevention, recovery, and advocacy.

In July 2011, ABC News announced that Elizabeth would work as a commentator for them, mainly focusing on missing people.  

While Elizabeth was in Paris working for the church, she met a Scottish man named Matthew Gilmour.  In January 2012, after dating for one year, they got engaged. They married on February 18, 2012 in a private ceremony at the Laie Hawaii Temple.  The couple has since had three children together.   

In February 2014, Elizabeth testified before the Utah State House of Representatives in favor of HB 286. The bill would create an optional curriculum for use in Utah schools to provide training on child sexual abuse prevention.

Elizabeth published a book in 2018 titled ‘Where There’s Hope: Healing, Moving Forward and Never Giving Up.’

In 2019, Lois filed for divorce from Ed Smart and he came out as gay.  Ed wrote a letter about his sexuality and said it was “one of the hardest letters I have ever written.”


“I have recently acknowledged to myself and my family that I am gay,” the letter states, per the Deseret News.

“The decision to be honest and truthful about my orientation comes with its own set of challenges, but at the same time it is a huge relief,” he continued. “Living with the pain and guilt I have for so many years, not willing to accept the truth about my orientation has at times brought me to the point where I questioned whether life was still worth living.”

Ed said that Lois, was “loyal” and said she is an “extraordinary mother.”

“I deeply regret the excruciating pain this has caused her. Hurting her was never my intent. While our marriage will end, my love for Lois and everyone in my family is eternal.” 

Elizabeth said at the time:  “Their decisions are very personal. As such, I will not pass judgment and rather am focusing on loving and supporting them and the other members of my family,” she said.

In 2019, while traveling home to Utah on a Delta flight, Elizabeth said that she was woken up by a male passenger next to her rubbing her inner thigh.  “I had been asleep and, all of a sudden, I woke up because I felt someone’s hand rubbing in between my legs, on my inner thigh,” Elizabeth told Gayle King. She reported the incident.

“We took the matter seriously and have continued to cooperate with Ms. Smart and the appropriate authorities as the matter is investigated,” Delta said.

After this incident, Elizabeth began a self-defense program for women and girls called Smart Defense.  “It doesn’t matter who you are, what you’re wearing. None of those things matter if you are abused or taken advantage of,” she said. “It’s not your fault, and you have every right to defend yourself, to take care of yourself, to do what you need to do to stay safe.”

Elizabeth also went on The Masked Dancer in 2021 where she competed as Moth. 

Jill Dando was murdered in London in April 1999 and she was the host of ‘Crimewatch’ at the time – similar to America’s Most Wanted.


Jill Wendy Dando was born on November 9, 1961.  She was born at the Ashcombe House Maternity Home in Somerset in England.  Her parents were Jack Dando and Winifred Mary Jean Hockey.  Winifred died from leukaemia in 1986 at aged 57.  Jack passed away in 2009.

Jill had one sibling, a brother Nigel who was born in 1952, so she was the baby of the family.


Jill’s parents raised her as a Baptist and it is said that she was a devout follower for her whole life.

When Jill was three, doctors found that she had a hole in her heart, as well as a blocked pulmonary artery.  She had heart surgery in January 1965, when she was 3.

Jill was successful amongst her peers during her school years.  She was head girl during her teen years.  She studied journalism at Cardiff Metropolitan University.

Jill also loved drama and acting.  She was a member of dramatic societies and theatre companies and appeared in plays at her local theatre.

Jill’s first journalistic job was as a trainee reporter for her local newspaper, the Weston Mercury.  Her brother Nigel and father Jack both worked on the paper.  After five years as a print journalist, she went to work for the BBC in 1985 – British Broadcasting Corporation.  

In 1997, Jill was named BBC Personality of the Year. 

In 1998, she made the big move from regional to national TV.  She moved to London to present BBC news.  

She was the host of many shows including Breakfast Time, Breakfast News, BBC One O’Clock news, Holiday and Crimewatch.  


Jill moved to Fulham in London in 1994.  Just as some background into that area, it is one of the nicest and is in the top four most expensive areas to live in London – the other areas are Kensington and Chelsea (think Kensington Palace), the City of Westminster (Westminster Abbey) and Camden. 

The final year of her life, 1999, was one of her most successful, professionally.   The day before she died, she presented the first episode of ‘Antiques Inspectors.’  She had been featured on the cover of Radio Times magazine from 20-24 April and she had been scheduled to present the British Academy Television Awards in May, alongside Michael Parkinson.  

It has been said that in 1999, Jill was among those with the highest profile of the BBC’s on-screen staff.


In terms of Jill’s personal life, in December 1997, she went on a blind date that had been set up by a mutual friend.  Her date was gynaecologist Alan Farthing.  Jill and Alan became engaged on January 31, 1999.  Their wedding date was set for September 25, 1999.


Just an interesting note, Alan went on to become Queen Elizabeth’s personal doctor.

We will now go into the timeline of the day of Jill’s murder, 26 April 1999.  Jill was 37 at the time.


In the morning, she left Alan’s home in Chiswick.  She drove to the house she owned in Fulham – around 4 miles and an 11ish minute drive, traffic dependent.  

Jill had originally lived in the house but was in the process of selling it and did not go there frequently.  

She got out of the car and walked to her front door.  At 11.32am, before she could go inside, she was shot once in the head.  

Her neighbor Helen Doble discovered her body 14 minutes later and police were called at 11.47am.  

Helen said ‘I’m walking along Gowan Avenue.  It looks like there is somebody collapsed.  Confidentially, it looks like it’s Jill Dando and she’s collapsed.  There’s a lot of blood.’

The operator asked Helen to check that the lady was breathing and Helen replied “ She doesn’t look as though she’s breathing.  She’s got blood coming from her nose.  Her arms are blue.’ 

The operator asked: ‘I just need to find out if she’s breathing. Is the lady’s chest going up and down?’

Helen started sobbing and she said: ‘Oh my God, no, I don’t think she’s alive. I’m sorry.’ 

Jill was taken to Charing Cross Hospital where she was declared dead on arrival at 1.03pm.


Some early reports about Jill’s death said that she had been stabbed multiple times, but this proved to be false.  

A Scotland Yard statement said: “A post mortem held today at Fulham mortuary established the cause of death as a brain injury caused by a single gunshot wound to the head.”

Alan, Jill’s fiance made a statement and said:

”I am totally devastated and unable to comprehend what has happened. Jill was respected for her professional ability, admired by all who met her and adored by anyone who got to know her.”

The Queen even made a statement saying she was ‘shocked and saddened’ by the murder.  Jill had helped the Duke of York to promote a charity called Fight for Sight.  Prime Minister Tony Blair also expressed shock about her death.  

A neighbor, Richard Hughes spoke about the murder and about seeing a man at the scene. 

“I heard her scream, it was a distinctive scream, she sounded quite surprised.

“I opened the shutters and saw a man, he was well dressed, he was wearing a Barbour-style jacket and at first I thought it must have been a friend of Jill’s as he looked very respectable.

“I went to the door and saw her lying on the doorstep, she was unconscious and covered in blood. I was obviously shocked. I took a look at her and she wasn’t breathing.”

Forensic testing indicated that Jill had been shot by a bullet from a 9mm short calibre semi-automatic pistol.  The gun had been pressed against her head at the time she was shot.  There is an in depth article from the Guardian titled ‘Shadow of Doubt’ and this info about the murder is from that:

As Jill was about to put her keys in the lock to open the front door of her home in Fulham, south-west London, she was grabbed from behind. (The late Iain West, then Britain’s leading pathologist, identified a recent bruise to her right forearm.) With his right arm, the assailant held her and forced her to the ground, so that her face was almost touching the tiled step of the porch. Then, with his left hand, he fired a single shot at her left temple, killing her instantly. It was very close to 11.30am. The bullet entered her head just above her ear, parallel to the ground, and came out the right side of her head and into the door, leaving a mark that was a mere 22cm above the doorstep.

For the killer, there were three advantages to such a clinical, one-shot murder. The first was silence. The gases escaping as the gun was discharged, which normally cause the report, instead exploded inside the head, so there was virtually no noise: Richard Hughes, Jill’s neighbour, was working at the front of the house and heard a brief, sudden cry, but no gunshot.

The second was that the assailant did not end up covered in flesh and blood. The third was speed – Hughes estimated a gap of only 30 seconds between hearing Jill get out of her car and the latch of the gate as the assailant, his job done, closed it behind him; the police estimated it happened even faster than that.



I believe the address of Jill’s house was 29 Gowan Avenue, London.  Online records say it is a 5 bedroom freehold terraced house – it is ranked as the 14th most expensive property in SW6 6RH, with a valuation of £1,847,000.

In terms of the gun and ammunition used, it has been theorised that the killer was practised and this is why the short weapon was used.  It seems like the plan was always to walk up and kill Jill at close range, so no long-distance accuracy was needed.  


When the bullet was examined, six tiny indentations were found. These were “crimping” marks, as the cartridge case was tightened around the bullet, and they were slightly irregular, which suggested that they were handmade. The bullet was correct for the cartridge case, and functioned perfectly in the gun, and the cartridge case was ejected on the spot. 

This suggests that the murderer had knowledge about handguns.

There was intense media coverage about Jill’s case.  The police named their investigation ‘Operation Oxborough.’  As Jill was so well-known, she had been in contact with thousands of people and was well known to millions.

Within six months of her murder, police had spoken to more than 2,500 people and had taken over 1,000 statements.  

Just to jump ahead slightly, by 2001, police had over 14,000 emails traced, and 5,000 people interviewed.

They had also identified 140 people who were found to have an “unhealthy interest” in Jill.

The main focus of the early investigation was on a man named Barry George.  Barry lived about half a mile from Jill’s Fulham house.  Barry had a history of being a creep – he had been known to stalk women and had been charged with sexual offences, as well as antisocial behavior.  

Interestingly, Barry also had a Princess Diana obsession.  He had been arrested in 1983 on the grounds of Diana’s home at Kensington Palace.  At that time, he had two knives as well as a 15 foot rope on him.  He was wearing combat gear and a gas mask. 

Offender profiling expert Dr Reid Meloy has said that Barry was ‘very much intending to assault or harm Diana.’  In 1983, Barry had been stopped four times in 10 months from hanging around Kensington Palace in the middle of the night.

Barry didn’t end up being charged over the incident, but when police later searched his apartment, they found pictures and articles about Diana, as well as details of the cars that she drove.

At one point, he was on Scotland Yard’s list of potential dangers to the royal family.

When Diana died in 1997, Barry went to the funeral.  He camped out all night at Westminster Abbey to ensure he got a good spot.  He had a sign that said “Queen of Hearts”, signed “Barry Bulsara, Freddie Mercury’s cousin (RIP)”.


Barry also had an obsession with Freddie Mercury.  

Just to make the whole Barry motive come full circle, the Guardian suggested that his obsession with Freddie could have been the motive to kill Jill.

“He disliked the BBC and its journalists because of the way Freddie Mercury had been treated before he died”, George had reportedly told one woman.


Barry was put under surveillance by police and he was arrested on 25 May 2000.  He was charged with Jill’s murder three days later, 28 May.

After Barry was arrested, he was diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome.  Prosecutions psychologists also found that he had several personality disorders including antisocial, histronic, narcissistic and paranoid, as well as ADHD.

He was also said to have epilepsy and and IQ of 75. (100 is average, scores under 70 would be considered below average or ‘borderline impaired.’ Most people have an IQ between 85 and 115. 130 is above average or ‘very superior’)

The main piece of evidence against Barry came when his coat was examined by Forensic Science Services.  

A single particle of firearms residue was found in the coat pocket.  It was no bigger than one hundredth of a millimetre.  Senior Forensic Officer Mr Keeley decided that it matched the discharge residue found at the scene of the killing.  Barry admitted that he had been wearing the coat on the day of the murder.

Their other reasoning for Barry’s guilt was that he fit the general description of the man seen fleeing the scene.  No witnesses positively identified the suspect as being Barry, but he had been identified as being in the area four hours before the murder.

When Barry was initially interviewed, he lied about his knowledge of Jill and he tried to create a fake alibi.  

In Barry’s defence, a Dr Lloyd gave evidence and said that in his opinion, the particle was so small that to rely on it as evidence one year after the murder was incredible.  He also argued that the particle could be a result of casual contamination.  

The jury took nearly five days to reach their verdict.  It was not unanimous (the verdict was a 10-1 majority) but it was a guilty verdict.    Barry was sentenced to life in prison on 2 July 2001.

An appeal by Barry in 2002 was unsuccessful.  Three senior Court of Appeal judges rejected claims that the evidence used to convict Barry was ‘flimsy’. 

The judges said: “We do not consider that the cumulative effect of delay and adverse publicity was such as to render a fair trial no longer possible.

“The trial which took place was fair.”

On identification, the judges ruled: “We are satisfied that there was evidence properly admitted and properly left to the jury for their consideration.

“It was evidence from which the jury could conclude that each witness saw the same man and that the man was the appellant, Barry George.”

Barry’s lawyers launched another appeal in 2006.  In March of that year, their appeal was based on fresh evidence regarding medical examinations.  These studies suggested that Barry was not capable of committing such a crime due to his mental disabilities.

The defence brought in neuropsychiatrist Michael Kopelman to dispute the prosecution’s claim that Barry showed signs of “histrionics, paranoia and narcissism” and had a personality disorder. Dr Kopelman testified that “[He] described to me that he can be aware of what’s going on around him but he just can’t respond”, and concluded that Barry was not calculating enough to have committed the crime.

A second part of the appeal was that two new witnesses say they saw armed police at the scene when Barry was arrested.  This is contrary to official reports where Metropolitan Police maintain there were no armed officers present.

The defence argued that because police officers were there, that may be how the gunshot residue transferred to Barry.

On 20 June, 2007, the Criminal Cases Review Commission announced that it would refer Barry’s case to the Court of Appeal.  The hearing began on 5 November, 2007.  Two days later, on 7 November 2007, the Court of Appeal reserved judgement in the case and on November 15, it announced that the appeal was allowed and Barry’s conviction was overturned.  

A retrial was ordered and Barry was kept in custody.


He appeared in court again on 14 December 2007 and pleaded not guilty.  His retrial began on 9 June, 2008.

For the defence William Clegg QC reminded the jury that evidence from three women from HAFAD (Hammersmith and Fulham Action on Disability) placed the defendant’s arrival at their offices at 11:50 or 12:00, which, according to Clegg’s argument, would have made it impossible for him to have committed a murder at Dando’s house at 11:30 and then gone home (in the wrong direction) to change. Two neighbours who almost certainly saw the murderer immediately after the shooting had seen him go off in this direction, and later failed to identify George at an identification parade. 

Barry was acquitted on 1 August, 2008.


Jill was buried next to her mother on May 21, 1999.  She was buried in the Ebdon Road Cemetery.  

Jill’s colleague Nick Ross worked with her fiance Alan and they raised around 1.5 million pounds.  They founded the Jill Dando Institute of Crime Science at the University College London.  It was opened on 26 April 2001, the second anniversary of Jill’s murder.

The BBC set up a bursary award in Jill’s name which enables one student each year to study journalism.  

Police have said that Jill’s case remains open.

 “The investigation into the murder of Ms Dando remains open, as with all murder investigations. We will always explore any new information which may become available.”

THEORIES

1 – A jealous ex or former lover killed Jill.  

Jill did have a few former boyfriends but police quickly ruled out this theory after cross referencing her phone records.

2 – Jill had been assassinated by someone as a result of her involvement in Crimewatch.    A type of retribution killing?  Police also ruled out this theory.  

3 – Was a deranged fan the murderer?  Nigel, Jill’s brother told police that she had been worried by ‘some guy pestering her’, but detectives also ruled out this theory.  

4 – Mistaken identity. This one seems unlikely seeing as Jill was literally killed on the doorstep of her own home. 

5 – Killed by a rival or a business partner.  There isn’t too much information on this one, but her agent Jon Roseman told the media that he had been interviewed as part of the investigation.  

6 – A connection to the Jimmy Saville sexual abuse scandal and a pedophile ring was also looked into.  Jimmy Saville was an English media personality who sexually abused hundreds of people in his life.  There was a rumor that Jill had investigated a pedophile ring associated with the Saville case.  The same rumor said that she had given a file with her findings to BBC management.  The theory related to this is that she was killed in a revenge attack.  The BBC has said there is no evidence to support this claim.  


As a lot of the theories involve Jill being targeted for whatever reason – jilted lover, angry colleague, retribution, this would have likely involved a contract killing.  As Jill was not living at the Fulham property and she only rarely visited there, police believed that a professional hitman would have been aware of the situation.  Police also looked at CCTV of Jill’s final journey to Fulham and did not find any evidence that she had been followed.

Following forensic investigation of the gun, it was argued by police too that a professional would not have used such a poor quality weapon.  This is part of the reason why the focus was on Barry George – as a crazy individual who acted on opportunity.

The final theory is that Jill was murdered due to her involvement in the Yugoslav Wars.  She had appealed for aid during 1999.  Her appeals for help for refugees had been shown on television three weeks before she died.  

As some background into this theory, the UK and NATO were involved in the Kosovo War, opposing Serbia.  After Jill was murdered, calls were made to the BBC and other media outlets taking responsibility for the crime on behalf of Serbian groups.  One call was made at 3pm on the day of the murder, just 2 hours after she was publicly pronounced dead.

“Re the murder of journalist. Tell your Prime Minister. In Belgrade 15 killed, so 14 more to go.”

Barry George’s defence barrister Michael Mansfield said during the trial that he believed Serbian warlord Arkan had ordered Jill’s assassination.  

“Jill Dando by this stage had become one of the, if not the, face[s] of the BBC. In short, she was the personification and embodiment of the BBC.”

In 2019, reports emerged that the British National Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS) had given an intelligence report to the Jill Dando murder investigators.  In this report, it was claimed that the murder was retaliation for bombing of the Radio Television of Serbia headquarters and that Arkan had ordered the murder.

The report outlined a possible connection between the bullet that killed Jill and bullets used for assassinations in Germany.  Another journalist, Slavko Curuvija, was assassinated outside his home in Belgrade just days before Jill died, and the method used in both cases was identical.  In 2019, four men from the Serbian Secret Service were convicted of Slavko’s murder.  

Despite all the arguments about the murder being carried out by a crazed gunman, there was a 2008 review carried out which concluded that Jill had been killed by a professional in a ‘hard contact execution’.  The gunman knew that pressing the gun against Jill’s head would have muffled the shot and would have also stopped the murderer from being splattered with blood.

In March 2023, Dentist Dr James Craig was arrested in Colorado for the murder of his wife Angela.


James and Angela lived with their six children in Aurora, Colorado.  James worked as a dentist at the Summerbrook Dental Group.  

You can view their Facebook accounts here:

https://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=586601275&mibextid=LQQJ4d

https://www.facebook.com/angela.n.craig.1

James’ lies started to unravel on March 15, 2023 at 11.10am.  Angela went to University Hospital with a severe headache.  She had also complained of dizziness.  Her brother took her to the hospital and James got there later.  

At 2pm, Angela had a seizure and her condition rapidly deteriorated.  She suffered from oxygen deprivation, had no pupil reaction and had pressure on her skull.  She was placed on life support and the medical team were at a loss as to what caused her to decline so fast.  


Just to note that all of this info comes from the affidavit which has been very poorly redacted.  We know that Ryan Redfearn (James’ business partner) is named many times, as is Ryan’s wife Michelle.

Michelle has a Ph.D in nursing just as some background.

Michelle has told police that March 15 was not the first time that Angela was sick.  She went to the hospital on March 6 and was released the same day.  She went back to hospital on March 9 and was released on March 14.  Doctors were at a loss as to what was causing her illness.  

When Angela went to hospital the second time, Michelle was continually in touch with James via text regarding her condition.





When Angela was admitted to hospital for the third time, an office manager at the dental practice contacted Ryan.  She relayed about how on March 6 (the day that Angela first went to hospital), that she saw James returned to the office after hours.  She said she saw him at an exam room computer with the lights off.  She thought this was weird as he had his own office and computer plus a laptop that he took to and from work.

After she left the office that night, James texted her to say that he was expecting a personal package in the mail and that she was not to open it.  


The package ended up arriving on March 13 and it was luckily intercepted by another employee.  When that person looked inside, she saw a ‘biohazard’ sticker and a circular canister that was labelled ‘potassium cyanide.’  She sealed it back up and gave it to James.

She kept thinking about the parcel and started to research potassium cyanide and the effects it could have on someone.  She realized at this time that Angela had the same symptoms.  This was how the phone call to Ryan on March 15 came about.  


The call to Ryan was made as he was en route to the hospital to see Angela.  

When Ryan and Michelle arrived, they spoke to James.  They said he stepped away to take a call from the doctor and that when he returned, he was visibly upset.  

James stepped away again and Ryan voiced his concerns to one of the nurses.  He told her that he was suspicious that Angela may have been poisoned.  He told the nurse that James had ordered potassium cyanide for their dental practice but they had no medical reason to have it there.  

The nurse called police and this is when the investigation into James began.

Ryan and Michelle left the hospital after this and they sat in their car.  James called Ryan.  The call was answered via bluetooth, so Michelle heard the conversation.  James said he had ‘heard some disturbing information’ and asked Ryan if he had said anything to the hospital staff.

Ryan told James that he was aware of the package that had been delivered to the office.   James lied and said that the package had been a ring to surprise his wife with.  Ryan told James he knew it had been potassium cyanide and asked why he would have purchased that.  James changed his story and said that he knew what was in the package, but that Angela had asked him to order it.  He said he ‘didnt think she would actually take it.’

At this point, Ryan told James he needed to get a lawyer.


Later that day, Ryan got a text from James.  He made an “an urgent plea” for him not to talk to anybody about their prior discussion, “including any law enforcement officers,” the affidavit reads. The text read, “You will do more damage than good to my family by continuing to insert yourself into this. Angela is gone and I am devastated.”

“Ryan, I understand why you did what you did. I do. I get it. But if you had come to me personally, man-to-man instead of talking to everyone else about what you thought you knew, I might have let you in on some details that would have made you less likely to cause this horrible storm.  “Ryan, if you had ONLY put me higher on your list of priorities instead of putting everyone else’s opinions and gossip ahead of me! For that I am very, very mad at you.”


At 12.30am on March 16, a detective went to the hospital to speak with medical staff.  At this time, Angela was still on life support with no brain activity and she had a very poor prognosis.

Police went and spoke with the office manager of the Summerbrook Dental Group that day.  She said that on March 6 (the day of Angela’s first hospital visit), James and Angela had exercised together.  He made her a protein shake and after she drank it, she felt faint and dizzy which is why he took her to the hospital.


Around this time, the office manager began to notice that James’ behavior was strange.  She said that she had a conversation with him about how Angela might not survive but that he quickly pivoted to talking about office business.  

She also told police that she knew Angela and James had been having marital issues and that Angela wanted a divorce.

Police also spoke with Ryan and Michelle on March 16.  Ryan told them that he had been business partners with James since August 2022, when he purchased the dental practice from him.  The business had been struggling financially.  They had known each other for more than 20 years and had gone to dental school together.

Records show that James filed for bankruptcy in 2021 and was on the verge of filing again.  

Ryan also told police about the marital issues that James and Angela had been experiencing. 


A CPS worker spoke with police on this day.  She told the detective about her individual meetings with James and his six children.  The CPS worker said James had made “some concerning statements” and “alleged that Angela was suicidal and had been for same time.” . He claimed to have revived her several times over the previous months. He also said he asked for a divorce in December 2022 and her depression and suicidal ideations had increase since then.

James also told the case worker that Angela had been intentionally overdosing but that he wasn’t sure what she had been taking.  He said he was sure her toxicology would be positive for something.  

According to the affidavit, the CPS worker “provided her opinion that James was attempting to build a cover story for what really happened to Angela.”


At the time this was all happening, James was staying with an unnamed friend.  Police went to that home at 8.30am on March 16 to speak to James.  He said he did not want to talk about Angela.  

Police served him with search warrants for his phone, Angela’s phone, his wallet and his laptop.  He gave police the phones and passcodes and he also gave them the password to his laptop.  He said he didn’t have a wallet but that he kept his cards and ID in his phone case.  Police took photos of the cards.

Police went to the Craig family home at 8.45am.  Nobody was home and they executed a search warrant.  They saw that there were surveillance cameras both inside and outside.  They amended the search warrant and seized these cameras.

In addition, multiple other items were collected from the residence. This included:

Multiple types of powder proteins
Multiple workout-style shakers used to drink those powder proteins
Computer tablet
Two different unlabeled plastic bags with white powdery substances
Water bottle on an exercise bike

Police executed a search warrant on the dental office at 11.45am.  They seized cameras and hard drives, as well as a laptop that James had recently used.  Police also took the contents of a vacuum for further examination.

They also found James’ DEA number during this search.  A DEA number is assigned to all health care providers and allows them to write prescriptions.

When police searched Angela’s phone, they found James was saved under ‘The Boy.’












On March 17, police searched the other electronic devices.  His phone was connected to the email dinosaurjim@me.com but investigators found another email on a hard drive in the dental office.  That email is jimandwaffles@gmail.com.

The waffles email was first created on February 27, 2023.


Waffles had searched many poison-related inquiries, including “How many grams of pure arsenic will kill a human” and “Is arsenic detectable in autopsy?” He had also searched for chemical suppliers in Aurora. Investigators also found an Amazon order from Feb. 27 to be delivered to the Craig household for an item called Arsenic Metal 99.9999% Crystalline Metalloid 10 grams for Element Collection, according to the affidavit. It was a $13 order.

Investigators also found additional online purchases of poison.

James searched for “buy arsenic, aurora, co,” “what can you use arsenic for” and other questions. In addition, he found a website with a page titled “Is Arsenic Detectable in Autopsy?” According to the affidavit, he also clicked on YouTube videos about making poison and a video titled “Top 5 Undetectable Poisons That Show No Sign of Foul Play,” the affidavit reads. He also clicked on a series of videos detailing how to make poison out of oleander, a toxic plant.

James had also visited a website that had info on arsenic and cyanide.  A video on this site explained how difficult cyanide is to detect and by the time doctor’s figure it out, it’s usually too late to save a life.

The email account attached to this search history had stopped communications with any contacts on March 16. Other orders were attached to the email, including Sigma 207810-25G from Midland Scientific. Investigators learned this is a technical term for potassium cyanide..

Shortly after this order was placed, a person with the company reached out to learn what James planned to use the item for, and to inform him that they did not have it in stock, but could ship it overnight. The order had a delivery address for the dental office.

The company sent James a Restricted Item Usage Statement Form to fill out about the purchase. He responded via email by saying he was a surgeon performing a craniofacial reconstruction and was using the chemical “to check and see if it will help with the layering of alternative metals” and if successful, the information would “be published as a paper in the National Institutes of Health,” according to the affidavit. He provided his license number and professional email, though he was still communicating at this point under the email jimandwaffles@gmail.com.

“At no time is James using his professional email, to your affiant’s knowledge, to make these purchases after alleging they are for work,” the affidavit reads.

Police found a separate order from AdooQ BioScience for 3 Oleandrin 1mg items, which totaled $330. The invoice was dated March 10, according to the affidavit. However, this was never delivered as investigators contacted FedEx about the situation and the process was stopped.

It was also discovered that the Waffles account had been communicating with a woman.  

We have found this woman online – her name is in the affidavit but we won’t blast her.  Her name is Karin and she is an orthodontist in another state.

According to police the emails between James and Karin were “intimate in nature and contained sexually explicit conversations.” . They also contained travel plans, which showed Karin flying from Austin to Denver March 8-10. The affidavit reiterates that Angela was in the hospital March 9-14.

A second travel itinerary for March 16-20 also showed a flight from Austin to Denver. This one was purchased on March 4, the same date arsenic was delivered to James’ home.


Police also spoke to Angela’s sister.  She said that James and Angela’s marriage was “tumultuous” and that he had had “multiple affairs with several women, told Angela he had been addicted to pornography since he was a teenager, and drugged Angela approximately five to six years ago.”

Angela apparently told her sister that James had drugged because he wanted to go into their bathroom and kill himself, and prevent her from saving him.


Angela’s sister said that Angela had planned to leave James many times, but he always convinced her to stay. She added that their finances “were dire” after he ran “the dental office into the ground,” the affidavit reads. Angela told her sister that James had gambled away more than $2,000 in Las Vegas recently.

The sister also told police that James had said he would not allow an autopsy to be conducted on Angela.  

She said she wanted one done in case her sister had had a genetic condition that could be passed down to their children.


Angela was pronounced brain dead on March 18, 2023 at 4.29pm.

The conclusion, as written in the affidavit, noted the following points:

Nobody aside from James Craig had suggested Angela Craig had suicidal ideations 

The Department of Human Services, which heard the above point from only him, said it believed he was creating a cover-up story

James Craig had been communicating with a woman in what appeared to be a sexual relationship while his wife was dying in the hospital, and helped arrange her travel plans

An email used to research undetectable poisons was only used from one of the dental rooms at his practice

That email had been used to purchase arsenic, which arrived to the Craig home on March 4

Angela Craig felt ill on March 6 and was hospitalized with symptoms consistent with arsenic ingestion. She was released later that day

James Craig ordered Oleandrin, which was intercepted and never delivered

On March 13, a package arrived and James Craig had instructed the office manager not to open it. This was potassium cyanide. A co-worker unaware of his instructions opened it

Angela Craig returned home from the hospital on March 14 after being admitted on March 9

She was back in the hospital the following day at 11 a.m. She was put on life support and did not regain brain activity before dying 

James Craig regularly made her protein shakes

Investigators believe the poison was in these shakes

The poisons were not located during the searches of the Craig home or dental office

The affidavit concludes by reading: “Based on the totality of the investigation, James has shown the planning and intent to end his wife’s life by searching for ways to kill someone undetected, providing her poisons that align with her hospitalized symptoms, and working on starting a new life with (Person D). Your affiant finds there is more than enough preliminary evidence sufficient to arrest James Craig with premeditated first-degree murder.”

When Maura Murray went missing, Facebook was five days old.  There is a 2014 quote from Bill Jensen about the case which is interesting and may explain the ongoing fascination with this one: On the Internet, Maura’s disappearance is the perfect obsession, a puzzle of clues that offers a tantalizing illusion—if the right armchair detective connects the right dots, maybe the unsolvable can be solved. And so every day, the case attracts new recruits, analyzing and dissecting and reconstructing the details of her story with a Warren Commission–like fervor.

As some background into Maura – she was born May 4, 1982, in Hanson, Massachusetts.


Maura was the fourth child of Frederick “Fred” and Laurie Murray. She had an older brother, Fred; two older sisters, Kathleen and Julie; and a younger half-brother, Kurt.

Maura was raised in an Irish Catholic household.

When she was six, her parents divorced, after which Maura lived primarily with her mother.

Murray graduated from Whitman-Hanson Regional High School, where she was a star athlete on the school’s track team.

She was accepted into the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York, where she studied chemical engineering for three semesters. 

After her freshman year, she transferred to the University of Massachusetts Amherst to study nursing.

Maura had a boyfriend at the time, Bill Rausch.


In the time leading up to her disappearance, Maura had been in some trouble.  

This info about an incident at West Point is from a Medium article titled – The Unsolved Disappearance of Maura Murray’. 


In August 2001, while at West Point, Maura was reportedly charged with theft for stealing cosmetics from a store at Fort Knox. An honorary investigative hearing was called on the commanding officer’s orders, indicating that they had enough evidence against her to “put her on trial” before the Cadet Advisory Committee.

The Council of Honor then recommended removing Maura from the cadet corps. This recommendation was forwarded to the Superintendent, who was to make a decision by the end of January 2002. However, Maura officially took a transfer from West Point on January 2, 2002, probably to avoid being expelled from West Point.

After this incident, Maura moved to UMass and started studying nursing.  In November 2003 (three months before she went missing), Maura was found to have stolen credit card numbers. Maura got the credit card details from receipts that had been thrown away and she ordered pizza. The charge for this was continued in December, to be dismissed after three months’ good behavior.

We will now move to February 2004, right before Maura disappeared.  She had a job as an on-campus security officer at UMass.

On Thursday February 5, 2004, at 10.20pm, Maura spoke on the phone to her sister Kathleen.  They had a discussion about Kathleen’s partner.  Kathleen has since said that nothing seemed amiss during this call.

10 minutes later, at 10.30pm, Maura started crying on the job.  When her supervisor arrived and asked her what was wrong, Maura was “just completely zoned out. No reaction at all. She was unresponsive.”   The supervisor did say Maura uttered two words ‘My sister.’


This has led many people to speculate what actually happened during the call, and in 2017, Kathleen clarified.  Kathleen, a recovering alcoholic, had been discharged from a rehab that evening, and on the way home, her fiancé took her to a liquor store, which caused an emotional breakdown.

There seems to be a bit of a time lag here because the next timestamp is around 1.20am on February 6 when Maura was escorted back to her dorm by her supervisor.

Maura’s dad Fred arrived in Amherst on Sunday February 7.  He has said they went car shopping, as Maura’s car was in bad shape and was unreliable.  Her car was a 1996 Saturn Vibrotron. After they went shopping, they also had dinner together.

After that, Maura dropped Fred off at his motel.  She then borrowed his Toyota Corolla.  I have read some reports that say the car was brand new.  She went back to campus to attend a dorm party. She arrived at 10:30 pm. At 2:30 am on Sunday, February 8, she left the party. At 3:30 am, en route to her father’s motel, she struck a guardrail on Route 9 in Hadley, causing nearly $10,000 (equivalent to $14,300 in 2021) worth of damage to her father’s car.

A police officer responded to the scene but there was no evidence of a field sobriety test being undertaken.  Maura was taken by police to her father’s motel room where she stayed the night.  At 4:49 am, there was a cell phone call placed to her boyfriend Bill from Fred’s phone. The participants and content of the phone call are unknown.

Later that day, still February 8, Fred found out that the damage to his car would be covered by his insurance. He rented a car, dropped Maura at her dorm, and departed for Connecticut. At 11:30 that night, Fred called Maura to remind her to obtain accident forms from the Registry of Motor Vehicles. They agreed to talk again Monday night to discuss the forms and fill out the insurance claim via phone.


Not too long after, we are now at midnight, early on February 9.


Maura got on her computer to search MapQuest for directions to the Berkshires and Burlington, Vermont.

After this, nobody has reported hearing from Maura until 1pm, when she emailed her boyfriend Bill.  She wrote:

“I love you more stud. I got your messages, but honestly, i didn’t feel like talking too much of anyone, i promise to call today though. love you, Maura”

Around the same time, she made a call inquiring about renting a condominium at Bartlett, New Hampshire.  Maura had stayed at this condo with her family in the past.  Telephone records indicate the call lasted three minutes. Maura did not ever end up renting the condo.

At 1:13 pm, Maura called a fellow nursing student  – the reasons for the call haven’t been made public.

At 1:24 pm, Maura emailed a work supervisor of the nursing school faculty that she would be out of town for a week due to a death in her family.   She said that she would contact them when she returned. Maura’s family later confirmed that there had been no death.

At 2:05 pm, Maura called a number which provided recorded information about booking hotels in Stowe, Vermont (800-GOSTOWE). The call lasted approximately five minutes. At 2:18 pm, she phoned Bill and left a voice message promising him they would talk later.  This call lasted for one minute.

After all this, Maura started packing up her vehicle.  She took clothing, toiletries, college textbooks, and birth control pills.  At some point between Sunday and Monday, she also removed the art from the walls of her dorm room and put most of her belongings into boxes.  


Maura printed an email between her and Bill that indicated there had been some trouble in their relationship, and she left the paper on top of the boxes.

Just to note, there were no classes on campus that day due to a snowstorm.

Maura drove away from UMass at 3.30pm on February 9.

At 3.40pm, Maura stopped and withdrew $280 from an ATM.  This was almost all of the money in her account – I believe there were a few dollars left. She then went to a liquor store where she purchased about $40 worth of alcoholic beverages, including Baileys Irish Cream, Kahlúa, vodka, and a box of Franzia wine.  She was seen on CCTV and was alone.

At some point on the 9th, Maura did pick up the accident forms that her father had requested she get.

Maura left Amherst between 4 and 5pm on February 9.  The last use of her cellphone was at 4.37pm when she checked her voicemail.  

Shortly after 7pm, Faith Westman, a resident in Woodsville, New Hampshire heard a loud thump outside her house. She looked out her window and could see that a car had hit a snowbank.  Faith called the Grafton County Sheriff’s Department at 7:27 pm to report the accident.

The 911 log says that Faith reported there was a man smoking a cigarette inside the vehicle.

However, she later stated that she had not seen a man nor a person smoking a cigarette, but rather had seen what appeared to be a red light glowing from inside the car, potentially from a cell phone.

A local bus driver named Butch Atwood was driving past the scene and he stopped at 7.33pm.  

Butch spoke with Maura for a few minutes.  He asked her if she wanted him to contact the cops. Maura declined, claiming she had already phoned AAA (according to one police log, Maura “begged” Butch not to call the cops).  Butch knew the AAA story was likely untrue as there was no cell phone service at the crash site. He noticed that Maura was shivering and cold and she appeared inebriated. To him, she didn’t look to be injured.

Butch walked a hundred yards up the road to the house, which he shared with his wife, and called 911. After initially failing to get through, he was able to report the accident at 7:43.  Butch could not see Maura’s car from his house, but he was able to see several other cars driving past.

Just as a side note, the location of the accident is around 150 miles or a 2.5 hour drive from Amherst.

Police officially arrived on the scene at 7.46pm.  The attending officer was Sergeant Cecil Smith.

I say officially, because another witness has said that at 7:37 pm, she drove to the scene and saw a police SUV parked face-to-face with Maura’s. She pulled over briefly and did not see anyone inside or outside the cars, and decided to continue home.  This has never been proven to be true but has been the cause of much discussion over the years.

Anyway, by 7.46, Maura was nowhere to be seen.  


In terms of damage to the car, it was inoperable.  It had hit a tree on the driver’s side of the vehicle, severely damaging the left headlight and pushing the car’s radiator into the fan.  The car’s windshield was cracked on the driver’s side, and both airbags had deployed. The car was locked.

Inside and outside the car, Sgt Smith saw red stains that looked to be red wine.


Inside the car, the officer found an empty beer bottle and a damaged box of Franzia wine on the rear seat. In addition, he found a AAA card issued to Maura; blank accident-report forms; gloves, compact discs, makeup, diamond jewelry; driving directions to Burlington, Vermont; Maura’s favorite stuffed animal, and Not Without Peril, a book about mountain climbing in the White Mountains.

Maura’s debit card, credit cards and cell phone were all missing from the vehicle.  None of these items have ever been found.  Police also later cross checked what Maura had purchased at the liquor store, and some of the bottles were found to be missing.  

Butch and Sgt Smith drove around the area looking for Maura.  At around 8pm, EMS and a fire truck arrived to clear the scene.  The car was towed by 8.49pm.  Sgt Smith left the scene at 9.30pm.

Upon further investigation of the car, a rag that was believed to have been part of Maura’s emergency roadside kit was discovered stuffed into the Saturn’s muffler pipe.

An auto mechanic was later asked about why this would have occurred.  He explained that stuffing a rag into a car’s tailpipe can be a way to plug it to check for leaks in the exhaust system, but that it would also stall the vehicle and at some point destroy the engine.  Fred has since said that he believes Maura’s car may have been smoking and she used the rag to stop that.

There was an alleged sighting of Maura between 8 and 9.30pm on February 9.  

Between 8:00 and 8:30 pm, a contractor returning home from Franconia saw a young person moving quickly on foot eastbound on Route 112 about 4 to 5 miles (6 to 8 km) east of where Murray’s vehicle was discovered. He noted that the young person was wearing jeans, a dark coat, and a light-colored hood. He did not report it to police immediately due to his own confusion of dates, only discovering three months later (when reviewing his work records) that he had spotted the young person the same night Maura disappeared.

At 12.36pm the following day, February 10, a BOLO was issued for Maura.  A voicemail was left on Fred ‘s home answering machine at 3:20 pm stating that her car had been found abandoned. He was working out of state and did not receive this call. At 5pm, one of Maura’s sister’s called Fred to let him know that Maura was missing.  He then contacted the Haverhill Police Department and was told that, if Maura was not reported safe by the following morning, the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department would start a search. 

Maura was first referred to as ‘missing’ at 5.17pm on February 10.

On February 11, Fred and some other members of Maura’s family travelled to the area where Maura vanished from.  They worked with New Hampshire Fish and Game to conduct a search.  A police dog used one of Maura’s gloves to track her scent.  The dog tracked it to 100 yards east of where her car was found but then it lost the scene.  Some believe this may mean Maura left the area in a vehicle.

Bill Rausch and his parents arrived in the area at 5pm that day.  Police questioned him both alone and with his parents present.  We learned that while he was flying to Haverhill, Bill turned off his phone.  When he turned it back on, there was a voicemail that he believed was the sound of Maura crying.  This call was eventually traced back to a calling card, issued by the American Red Cross.

Sharon Rausch, Billy’s mother, described the message: “It was very short — consisted of a shivering, soft whimpering sound with labored breathing as if someone was very cold.”

Bill had been having problems with his phone where callers were sometimes sent to voicemail without realizing it, which could explain why a message was left and no one spoke, Sharon said.

At 7pm that day, police said they believed Maura had either run away or taken her own life.  

The FBI joined the search for Maura ten days after she disappeared.  The searches continued by many LE agencies.  They used resources such as a helicopter with thermal imaging cameras, tracking dogs and cadaver dogs.


In March 2004, Brianna Maitland went missing in Montgomery, Vermont.  There are some seeming similarities between the cases – both cars had been involved in an accident prior to the women disappearing.  Brianna disappeared around 66 miles away from where Maura was last seen.  

Brianna is also still missing but police have repeatedly said there is no likely no connection between the two cases.


Maura’s case is one where a lot of people have inserted themselves.  In late 2004, a man gave Fred a rusty, stained knife that had allegedly belonged to the man’s brother.  His brother and his brother’s girlfriend were said to have acted strangely after the disappearance, and the man’s brother claimed he believed the knife had been used to kill Maura.  Just days after the man told Fred this story, the man’s brother allegedly scrapped his Volvo. Family members of the man who turned in the knife claimed he had made up the story in order to obtain reward money in the investigation, and that he had a history of drug use.

In 2006, the New Hampshire League of Investigators, ten retired police officers and detectives, and the Molly Bish Foundation started working on the case. 


Tom Shamshak, a former police chief and a member of the Licensed Private Detectives Association of Massachusetts, said, “It appears…that this is something beyond a mere missing persons case. Something ominous could have happened here.”

You will hear a lot about the ‘A Frame’ house mentioned in Maura’s case.  

In October 2006, volunteers conducted a search of the few miles around where Maura crashed the car.  They searched this A Frame house and cadaver dogs allegedly went “bonkers”, possibly identifying the presence of human remains. The house had formerly been the residence of the man implicated by his brother, who had given Fred Murray the rusty knife.

Carpet was taken from the home for testing but the results have never been made public.

On the tenth anniversary of Maura’s disappearance in 2014, Senior Assistant Attorney General Jeffery Strelzin said “We haven’t had any credible sightings of Maura since the night she disappeared.”

Fred also spoke to the New York Daily News for the anniversary and said he believed Maura had been abducted and that she was no longer alive.  

On the 15th anniversary in 2019, Fred spoke about his belief that Maura had been murdered in the A Frame house.  “That’s my daughter, I do believe.”  In April 2019, the house had new owners and they allowed a search to take place.

The excavation conducted in early April found “absolutely nothing, other than what appears to be a piece of pottery or old piping.”

That is essentially it in regards to Maura’s disappearance and the search for her.  

In terms of recent updates,  in late 2021, human remains were found at a site around 25 miles away from the crash site.  Maura was familiar with the area that the remains were found in, so we thought this might be the conclusion in her case.  It wasn’t to be though and in November 2021, the remains were announced to not belong to Maura. 


In January 2022, FBI issued a national alert in Murray’s case and created a Violent Criminal Apprehension Profile, allowing multiple law enforcement agencies to share information regarding her case. In July 2022, law enforcement in New Hampshire initiated a search in the towns of Landaff and Easton.  

To mark the 19th anniversary of Maura’s disappearance, new billboards have been placed in Mass and NH.  Maura’s sister Julie spoke to the media:

“I cannot believe that it’s been this long. At the same time, it feels like it was just yesterday,”

“It’s gotten a lot of positive energy, which is exactly what we need. At exactly the right time.”

“There’s been no cell phone activity, no bank activity, not a single credible sighting in 19 years,” Julie said. “Nothing has ever been found. Based on that it leads me to believe she is no longer with us … and was mostly likely met with foul play.”

Since Maura vanished, there have been two other notable losses in her family.  Her mother Laurie passed away in May 2009 after a battle with cancer.


Maura’s sister Kathleen (the one she had the upsetting phone call with right before disappeared) died at age 44 in November 2021.  Her obituary says she passed from cancer and I believe she also had some addiction issues over the years.

In 2021, we did a two part episode on the Murdaugh family saga.  We covered the mysterious death of their housekeeper and the death of Mallory Beach at the hands of a drunk Paul Murdaugh in a boat crash.  We also discussed how police were looking into other cold cases in the area to see if the Murdaugh’s could be attached.

And of course we spoke about the June 2021 murders of Maggie Murdaugh and her son Paul.  They were shot multiple times at their 1,770 acre hunting property in Islandton, SC.

As we have those two episodes, we won’t go into the Murdaugh background in this episode.  We absolutely recommend listening to those first if you’re not familiar with the case.  This episode is going to be about Alex Murdaugh’s trial.  Alex was Maggie’s husband/Pauls’ father and he was charged with their murders.  

So, the trial began on January 25, 2023.

The lead prosecutor in this case was Creighton Waters.  In his opening statements, he said that law enforcement had GPS from Alex’s smart devices and that they also had cell phone video which placed him at the hunting lodge at the time of the murders.  

Paul had taken a video on the night of the murders, June 7, 2021, at 8.45pm.  In the video, which was taken near dog kennels on the property, you can hear Paul’s voice, as well as the voices of Alex and Maggie.  


Alex originally told police that he wasn’t near the kennels at the time but he later admitted that he had lied.

On January 26, footage from a police officer’s body cam was shown in court.  This officer responded to the call of Maggie and Paul being found dead.  

Alex cried in court when the footage was shown, but the responding officer said that Alex did not cry at the crime scene on the night of the murders.  The officer said Alex didn’t seem upset and that there were ‘no visible tears.’


In the bodycam footage, Alex can be seen telling police that Paul had received threats due to the boat crash that killed Mallory Beach.

“This is a long story. My son was in a boat wreck months back, he’s been getting threats, most of them benign stuff we didn’t take serious.” 


Just as a reminder about Paul and Maggie’s injuries – Paul was shot twice with a shotgun.  Maggie was shot in the back with an assault rifle and was then shot several more times while she was on the ground.


On January 27, Alex’s lawyer Jim Griffin argued that because authorities had been invited to search the property, that was a sign of Alex’s innocence.  He said no guilty person would be so transparent.

Jim also cross examined Detective Laura Rutland about how Alex looked on the night of the murders.   There was allegedly no blood on his clothing. 


“He didn’t look like someone who had just been within feet of blowing Paul’s head off, right?”

She responded, “I can’t say that. There are so many factors that you would have to take into account.” Though, she said that Alex could have changed his clothes after the shooting.

“He’s sweating, and they’re dry, so I’d say yes,” she said.

There was a break in court proceedings after this and they didn’t reconvene until January 31, 2023 which was a Tuesday.  

Jeff Croft who is an agent with the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division testified on this day about Alex’s alleged questioning following the murders.  He said that Alex cried during a police interview and after seeing graphic photos of Paul’s body, he said “It was so bad, I did him so bad. “He’s such a good boy, too.”

The defense tried to argue that Alex had actually said ‘They did him so bad.”  The recording was then replayed at ⅓ speed and Jeff said ‘I still hear him say I.”

On February 1, Britt Dove who is with the computer crimes unit for the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division (you may have also heard this division referred to as SLED during the trial – State Law Enforcement Division), testified about the use of Maggie’s phone on the night of her murder.  

Maggie apparently made a phone call at 7.50pm that lasted for three minutes.  She also sent messages to a friend that night as she headed to the hunting property.  She said that something felt ‘fishy’ about Alex’s behavior. 


Maggie and Alex had been having a rough time in their marriage and she had been staying at their beach house on Edisto Island, which was an hour away from the lodge.

Alex had apparently asked Maggie to meet there as his father Randolph Murdaugh III (81) was dying.  He said that she needed to see him before he passed and asked her to come to the lodge so they could travel together to the hospital.  She initially declined and asked that they meet at the hospital.  Fatefully, she ended up changing her mind and she agreed to meet him at the lodge.

“He’s up to something,” Maggie allegedly wrote to her friend.

When Maggie arrived at the house, she left her car running.  She walked to the dog kennels where Paul was taking photos of a dog that he was watching for a friend.  

After the 7.50pm phone call, Maggie didn’t use the phone again.  At 9.06pm, after it was believed that Maggie had already been murdered, the phone’s camera activated for a second.  “It appears the phone’s being moved and the camera’s activating in the background to see if it would recognize somebody’s face that would unlock it,” Britt said. In the next hour, Alex called Maggie three times and sent her a text saying “Call me babe.” Prosecutors claimed that this activity by Alex was an effort to create an alibi. 

Maggie’s phone was discovered discarded beside the road outside the gates of the estate.


On February 2, 2023, footage of Alex emerged that showed he had two different outfits on the night of the murder.

Prosecutors said that there was a Snapchat video that showed Alex wearing khakis and a blue shirt about an hour before the murders.  When he spoke to police following the murders, he had a white t-shirt and shorts on.


On February 6, 2023, Mushelle ‘Shelley’ Smith who had been a caregiver to Alex’s mother testified.  She said that he visited his mother’s home for 15-20 mins on the night of the murders, but he told her to say that he was there for 30-40 minutes ‘if someone asked.’  

She also said that Alex’s behavior was ‘fidgety’ that night and he also offered to give her money for her wedding expenses.


Alex’s alibi for the night of June 7 was that he had visited his dying father and had also spent time at his mother’s home.  He said after those visits, he got home to the hunting lodge and found Maggie and Paul dead.   

Shelley’s testimony is important because if Alex was really only at his mother’s home for 15-20 minutes, he would have had time to commit the murders.

On February 7, Jeanne Seckinger who is CFO of the law firm where Alex was a partner, testified that she suspected he was stealing funds from the company.  She said Alex had been writing company checks to a client but depositing them into a personal account of his.  She said that on June 7 (the day of the murders), she confronted Alex about the missing money, which by then totalled $2.8m.

Jeanne said Alex was annoyed and abrupt during their discussion.  He apparently received a call around this time about his father’s declining health.  Jeanne told Alex they could discuss the missing money at a later date.

She testified that Alex had likely been stealing money since 2011.  “I take his conduct very personally. He stole money,” she claimed. “That money was stolen.”


On February 8, 2023, a bomb threat was called into the court house.  

At noon, a clerk at the sheriff’s office received a call from an anonymous phone number. The caller told the clerk that there was a “bomb in the judge’s chamber.”   The courthouse was evacuated. 

The threat was eventually traced back to Joey Dean Coleman, a 32-year-old man incarcerated in a different county.  He had/has no apparent link to Alex or the murder trial, the Colleton County Sheriff’s Office alleged.

Officials allowed people back into the courtroom at around 2.30pm. 


On February 15, 2023, Maggie’s sister Marion Proctor took the stand.  She said that she had a strange conversation with Alex directly after the murders.  

She asked Alex if Maggie had suffered when she died.  “He assured me that she had not. Now, I don’t know that I think that was true.’


She also said that Alex did not seem concerned with finding the alleged perpetrator of the crimes.  

“We never talked about finding the person who could have done it. It was just odd.”

Marion said that Alex said “he did not know who it was, he felt like whoever did it had thought about it for a long time.”

“I just didn’t know what that meant,” she said.

Marion also said that in the months after the murders, Alex said his number one goal was clearing Paul’s name regarding the boat crash that killed Mallory Beach.

“He said that his number one goal was clearing Paul’s name. And I thought that was so strange, because my number one goal was to find out who killed my sister and Paul.”


On February 16, the defense insinuated that Alex’s cousin Curtis ‘Eddie’ Smith could have been involved in the murders.  They said his involvement in giving Alex drugs as well as his involvement in Alex’s failed ‘suicide for hire’ attempt meant that he could have been part of the murders.

On this day, details of Alex’s drug addiction were also discussed.  There was a claim made by the defense that Alex was at one point, spending up to $50k per week on drugs.

On February 21, 2023, the only remaining Murdaugh child, Buster, took the stand.  

Buster spoke about finding out about the murders’  He said Alex called and said ‘are you sitting down?’  “He sounded odd, and then he told me that my mom and my brother had been shot.”

Buster said that Alex was distraught on the night of the murders.  “He was heartbroken,” he said. “I walked in the door and saw him, gave him a hug. He was destroyed.”

Buster also spoke about how Paul and Maggie had allegedly confronted Alex in the past about his drug use.  Alex went to rehab in 2018 and Buster said “I thought that he had handled it.”  He then said that there were “a couple of more times” that his father had relapsed. He testified that his father was always “apologetic and sorry” when he was confronted about his drug use.

Buster wasn’t asked about his father’s guilt or innocence and he squeezed Alex’s hand after he finished testifying.


February 23, 2023 was a big day.  Alex took the stand.  The defense began by asking Alex if he used any gun to “blow his son’s brain out,” or to shoot Maggie.  Alex replied “I did not shoot my wife or my son,” and denied killing them multiple times while on the stand.

Alex’s voice became shaky as he held back tears. 

“I could never intentionally do anything to hurt either one of them,” he testified. “Not ever.”

He then explained that his nickname for his son Paul was “Paul Paul” or “Pau Terry”.


“You couldn’t be around Paul Paul without having fun,” Alex said. “He was an absolute delight.”

Alex admitted on this day to lying about where he had been on the day of the murders.  

“Why did you lie?” the defense asked.

“As my addiction evolved over time I would get in these situations or circumstances where I would get paranoid. I’m sorry I lied.”

“What a tangled web we weave,” Alex said. “Once I told a lie — then I told my family — I had to keep lying.”

“I lied about being down there, and I’m so sorry that I did.

Alex took the stand again the following day, February 24.

He spoke about his addiction to opioids and said he was taking more than 2,000 mg per day in the months leading up to the murders.

He continued saying “most days were more than that and many days would be … more than 2,000 milligrams a day.”

He testified that he was taking “30-milligram pills instant-release oxycodone, probably mixed in with some OxyContin, which is made of oxycodone — it’s just time release.”

He said that taking the pills made whatever he was doing ‘more interesting.’ 

He said he had a ‘pocketful of pills’ when he was speaking to SLED following the murders.  


On February 28, 2023, Alex’s younger brother, John Marvin Murdaugh took the stand as the defense’s last witness before they rested their case.  John spoke about cleaning up the crime scene.  

‘I saw blood, I saw brains, I saw pieces of skull, I saw tissue,” he said. “And when I say brains it could just be tissue. I don’t know what I saw, it was just terrible.”

He said the scene was released back to the family just hours after the murders.  When he visited the site, he said the spot where Maggie was found was covered with dirt ‘so there was really nothing to do.”

When he got to the feed room where Paul had been found, he said it had not been cleaned up.  He said he started cleaning up the blood, brain and skull pieces.  “It felt like it was the right thing to do,” he said, breaking down in tears. “I felt like I owed him, and I just started cleaning, and I promise you, no mother, father, aunt, or uncle should ever have to see and do what I did that day. It’s the hardest thing I’ve ever been through in my life.”

“I told Paul I loved him, and I promised him I’d find out who did this,” he testified.

John was also asked about Alex’s relationship with Maggie, Paul and Buster.  

“All marriages, I’m sure, have hiccups here and there, but I’m telling you it was a good marriage.


“Anything that the boys were doing, Alex wanted to do.”

John Marvin also spoke about how he had been the one to find Maggie’s phone following the murders.  He said, “it was brought to my attention that Maggie’s phone was not there and that law enforcement had not found it.”

He said when he turned on the “Find My iPhone” app on Buster’s phone, “it pings Maggie’s phone just out front of the property.”

He said he went to the shed on the property and told law enforcement that he had located the phone and that they could go get it.

But he said he was told, “No need,” because the law enforcement at the scene had technology that it was going to use to find the phone later that day.

John Marvin said he was perplexed by that because the phone was “right out here.”

John Marvin also gave testimony about Alex’s addiction and recounted a time where he had taken his brother to rehab.

“At one point he had taken the seatbelt off and he has his head down… and he is trying to stretch his legs and just kind of thrashing them and kicking them. Again, I’ve seen TV but I’ve never seen something like this in real life.”

“He messed himself. He had diarrhea and, it’s just, he couldn’t control it. When I say diarrhea I am not talking about a restroom, I am talking about the car and his pants.”


On March 1, the jurors visited the scene of the murders.  They spent around an hour looking around the property. 

On March 2, 2023, after deliberating for less than three hours, the jury found Alex guilty of the murders of Maggie and Paul.  

“I want to thank the jurors for their service and the justice they delivered to Richard Alexander Murdaugh today,” Senior Assistant Deputy Attorney General Creighton Waters said in a news conference following the verdict.

“Alex Murdaugh tried one last con to prevent the accountability he has never had to face in his life, but the jury saw through that and properly found he murdered his wife and son in cold blood,” he added.

On March 3, 2023, Alex was sentenced to two life sentences which will run consecutively.

Just before handing down the ruling, Judge Newman told Alex, “It might not have been you. It might have been the monster you become. When you take 20, 40, 50, 60 opioid pills, maybe you become another person.”


TIMELINE OF JUNE 7 

During the trial, we learned more about the confirmed timeline of events on June 7.

Before we get to the verdict, I think this might be a good point to run through it, so we are all totally clear on what happened.

At 12.06pm, Alex left the Moselle hunting lodge to drive to the PMPED law firm in Hampton where he worked.  He arrived at 12.24pm.

At 3.28pm, the family housekeeper Blanca Turrubiate-Simpson finished cooking dinner for the family.  She texted Maggie “dinners on the stove, just left’.  Maggie texted back ‘Thank you.”  at 3.40pm.

At 3.41pm, Alex attempted to FaceTime Maggie.  She didn’t answer.  A SLED agent said later that the log for this call was manually deleted from Alex’s phone.

At some point before 4pm, Roger Dale Davis arrived at the lodge to feed the dogs and chickens and to clean out the animal pens.  He later told police that nobody was there when he arrived and that nothing was out of place.

At 3.55pm, Maggie texted the housekeeper Blanca.  ‘Im waiting at doctor.  Alex wants me to come home.  I have to leave the door open at Edisto.  I trust Mexicans to shut and lock for me.  His dad is back in hospital.  No cancer.  It’s pneumonia.’

She texted Blanca again at 3.57pm regarding the pressure that Alex was under.  ‘Alex is about to die.  Hope he doesnt go down there to sleep.  Alex needs to take care of himself as well.”

At the same time, Alex texted Maggie and said ‘how’s your doctor appt?”

She wrote back ‘waiting as usual.’

Maggie continued texting Blanca.  At 4.06pm, she wrote ‘I’m scared for him and Alex and all of us.’  – this is in regards to Alex’s dying father. 

Blanca texted Maggie, “I know just pray about it. Just pray about it and hope he gets a little better. Alex and you really need to relax. Always being on the go with little to no sleep is not healthy. I have a doctor’s appointment in the morning in Beaufort. If I go to Moselle I will let you know.”

Alex’s phone records placed him at the PMPED law firm between 4.10 and 6.25pm.

Maggie’s phone records placed her in the West Ashley area near Charleston between 4.25pm and 7.05pm. 

Roger Dale Davis left Moselle at 4.30pm after caring for the animals.

At 4.35pm, Alex attempted again to FaceTime Maggie.  She didn’t answer and this call was also later manually deleted from Alex’s phone.

Paul Murdaugh was in Okatie between 5.30 and 6.09pm according to his phone records. 

At 6.08pm, Paul called ‘Dad’.  No record of this call was ever found in Alex’s phone.

At 6.09, Maggie texted Paul saying that she was getting a foot massage.

Maggie’s sister Marian called her at 6.20pm.  Maggie texted her saying that she couldn’t talk because she was getting the foot massage.

At 6.23pm, Paul texted Maggie to ask what Blanca prepared for dinner.  She replied that it was country fried steak and mac and cheese.

At  6.24PM, Alex’s vehicle left the PMPED law firm and headed to the hunting lodge.  He received a call from Jay Parker at 6.25pm.  

Between 6.17 and 6.53pm, Paul’s phone records show that he was traveling from Okatie to Moselle.

At 6.40pm, Paul called ‘Pa’.  The call lasted 2 mins and 29 seconds.  Again, there is no call log found in Alex’s phone for this.

Alex arrived at Moselle at 6.42pm.

At 6.43pm, Alex called Maggie and the call lasted 104 seconds.  Again, no call log is found in his phone.

At 6.53pm, Paul called John Marvin.

By 7.04pm, Paul was at Moselle.

At 7.05pm, Alex texted Maggie saying ‘Paul says you are getting a pedi!  Call when you get done.’

At 7pm, Paul texted CB Rowe to ask if he was coming to Moselle the next day.  Alex texted CB Rowe at 7.18pm saying ‘Call me pls.’

(As a note, CB Rowe had been hired to help maintain the Moselle property).

Between 7.07pm and 7.50pm, Maggie’s phone records show that she was traveling from the North Charleston area towards Moselle.

At 7.09pm, Maggie called Courtney Shelbourne and that call lasted 3 seconds.

At 7.09pm, Maggie called ‘Mom’.  That call lasted 8 mins and 17 seconds.

At 7.18pm, Maggie called ‘Barbara.’  That call lasted two seconds.  

Maggie called her sister Marian back at 7.31pm.  This call lasted 7 mins and 39 seconds.

Between 7.35pm and 7.41pm, Paul’s phone recorded 171 steps.

At 7.39pm, Maggie called ‘Barbara’ again.  There was no answer.

At 7.39pm. Paul recorded the video of Alex as a Snapchat video that he sent around 15 mins later.

Between 7.41pm and 7.48pm, Alex’s phone recorded 29 steps.

Between 7.45 and 7.56pm,Paul’s phone placed him near the dog kennels on the property.

At 7.50pm, Maggie’s phone is in Walterboro which is around 30 mins from Moselle.  This is the last location data pulled from her phone.  At this time, she called ‘Barbara’ again.  That call lasted 8 seconds.

Between 7.55pm and  8.05pm, Paul’s phone recorded 262 steps.  Alex’s phone recorded 270 steps at the same time.

At 7.59pm, Paul sent a Snapchat video of Alex. 


At 8.06pm, Paul’s phone started moving from the kennels to the main house.  He sent a Snapchat to several friends at 8.07pm.

Between 8.09-9.02pm, Alex’s phone recorded no steps.  This indicates he was not moving with the phone on him.  He later told police that he was sleeping during this time. 

Maggie’s phone remained locked between 8.11pm and 8.31pm.

Paul’s phone was in the main house between 8.14pm and 8.35pm.

His phone recorded steps between 8.15 and 8.21pm.  Maggie’s phone recorded steps between 8.17-8.18.

Over the next ten minutes, between 8.19pm and 8.29pm, Paul sends messages and responds to messages.

At 8.31pm, John Marvin texted several family members including Alex and Maggie saying ‘I plan to go over and visit dad tomorrow afternoon.  Is anyone else planning to go?”  Maggie’s phone unlocked for this notification at 8.49pm.  Alex did not read this text until 1.44pm the following day.

By 8.38pm, Paul’s phone placed him at the kennels.  At 8.40pm, Paul called his friend Rogan Gibson.  Paul was minding Rogan’s dog and wanted to know if there was something wrong with the dog’s tail.  That call lasted 4 minutes and 14 seconds. At 8.44pm, Paul recorded a video for Rogan of his dog.  You can hear three voices in the video – witnesses have testified that those voices are Maggie, Paul and Alex.


Paul texted back and forth with a friend after this from 8.47pm to 8.49 when his phone was locked.

Maggie’s phone unlocked at 8.49pm and she read a text in the group chat about Randolph.

She accessed an app at 8.49pm and the phone was locked shortly after.  It was not unlocked until the following day when it was found a quarter mile away.  

At 8.49pm, Rogan texted Paul about the dog’s tail.  ‘See if you can get a good picture of it.  MaryAnn wants to send it to a girl we know that’s a vet.  Get him to sit and stay.  He shouldn’t move around too much.’

Paul never read that message.

Investigators believe Paul and Maggie were killed at around 8.50pm near the kennels.  Paul was shot twice with a shotgun – once in the head and once in the chest.  Maggie was shot 5 times with 300 blackout ammo from an AR style rifle.  Two of those shots struck her in the head. 

The next parts of the timeline are from after the murders.

At 8.53pm, Maggie’s phone screen was woken up to activate the Face ID security feature.  The phone remained locked, indicating it wasn’t Maggie who picked up the phone.  Her phone recorded 59 steps between 8.53 and 8.55pm.

Her phone took a screenshot of Facebook at 8.55pm.

Alex’s phone came to life at 9.02pm.   In 4 minutes, it recorded 283 steps which is around 70 steps per minute.  He called Maggie at 9.04pm.  He then called his father Randolph at 9.06pm.  That call lasted 18 seconds.  There was no record of either call in the data extraction from Alex’s phone. 

He called Maggie again at 9.06pm and there was no answer.  

He left Moselle at 9.07pm and headed to Almeda.

At 9.08pm, Alex’s car drove past the spot where Maggie’s phone would be found the following day.  After passing that location, the vehicle’s speed quickly increased.

At 9.08pm, Alex texted Maggie saying ‘Going to check on Em be rite back.’

Alex called Buster at 9.10 and that call lasted 60 seconds.  

At 9.12pm, Alex called his friend and fellow attorney Chris Wilson.  Chris said he was busy and would call Alex back.  

At 9.18pm, Alex called John Marvin and that call lasted for 106 seconds.  Again, no record of the call in Alex’s phone.

At 9.20pm, Chris Wilson called Alex back.  They speak for 3 minutes.

At 9.22pm, Alex arrived at his mother’s property in Almeda.  The speed of this trip is faster than any trip he took that day, reaching speeds of 74 miles per hour.  

At 9.24pm, Shelly Smith, the caregiver, said that Alex called from outside and asked to be let in.  Alex’s mother has dementia and Shelly said that she was asleep during the visit and that Alex was on his phone most of the time.

At 9.34pm, Rogan texted Maggie after he didn’t hear back from Paul.  He said ‘Tell Paul to call me.’.  That text went unread.

Alex called Paul at 9.46pm and the connection lasted 18 seconds.  He texted Maggie at 9.47pm and said ‘Call me babe.’  That text went unread. 

Chris Wilson and Alex played phone and text tag for a few minutes between 9.52 and 9.53.pm.

Rogan called Paul at 9.57pm and there was no answer.  One minute later, he texted Paul ‘Yo.’

At 10pm, Alex returned to Moselle and parked at the main house.  On the drive back, he reached speeds of 80mph when the max speed limit was 55mph.

Alex originally drove and parked his vehicle at the main house at around 10pm,  At 10.05pm, he drove to the kennels.  He called 911 at 10.06pm to report that Maggie and Paul had been shot.  

After the 911 call ended, Alex drove his vehicle back to the main house, before returning again to the kennels at 10.14pm.  At 10.17pm, Alex started calling and messaging people including Randy Murdaugh.  He texted ‘Pls call me.  Emergency.’ 

Police arrived at the kennels at 10.25pm and SLED were contacted for assistance. 

At 10.47pm, Alex texted Buster saying ‘Call me urgent’.  Buster called Alex at 10.47pm and that call lasted 162 seconds.  He called back again at 10.56pm and that call lasted 216 seconds.  

SLED arrived on the scene at 11.47pm.

The first alleged scammer we are going to discuss in this blog is Brian Johnson aka the Liver King.

He is known for promoting what he calls an “ancestral lifestyle”, which includes eating large amounts of raw organs and meat, and he recommends eating liver daily.

Brian preaches his nine “ancestral tenets”: sleep, eat, move, shield, connect, cold, sun, fight, bond.


He has around 3.5m followers on Tiktok, 1.8m on Instagram and around 250k subscribers on youtube.

As of May 2022, I believe Brian was 45, so he is likely around 46 now.  


The Liver King says he eats about a pound of raw liver each day, a quantity that he says is “way too much” for most organ novices, who should start with three ounces, two times a week. He says he can manage the massive dose of folate, iron, and vitamins A and B because he understands the science behind it. As he puts it on his website: “I’m not a hospital, I’m not a doctor, this is not medical advice. I do, however, have a degree in biochemistry.”  He has also eaten bone marrow, tongue and testicles.  He said that his own testicles are strengthened when he eats animal testicles.  ‘Vegetables don’t have the raw material required to produce a healthy set of testicles.  Animal testicles do have everything required to  produce and support and strengthen them.’ 

The Liver King’s followers are called ‘primals’.  He has some fairly high profile followers including MSNBC anchor Chris Hayes who tweeted ‘Guys, Liver King is in NYC and I’m losing my mind.’

Joe Rogan has also discussed the Liver King.  However, his views were not so complimentary.  He said ‘He’s got an ass filled with steroids, is what that guy’s got.’

The Liver King responded to that claim in an interview with GQ.  ‘I don’t touch the stuff’.  “The question has always been, ‘Do you take steroids? Do you take [performance enhancing drugs]?’ The answer to that is no. I’ve always told the truth, I still tell the truth.”  He also said that he was ‘grateful to Joe Rogan for bringing me into his ecosystem.’  He also said he would love to go on Rogan’s podcast one day.  

Just for some insight into his life and family, Brian now lives in an 8,300 square foot Spanish revival style mansion in Austin, Texas with his wife Barbara and their two sons, Stryker (around 16) and Rad (around 14).  Barbara and Brian call their sons ‘Savage Liver Boys’.  The family also have four Dobermans.  They met in 2004 when they were both snowboarding. “I was good at being a man before I met her, but she made me a good man,” he said.


Brian originally enrolled in medical school, but he dropped out during orientation.   He then went to work for a pharma company.

Barbara is successful in her own right.  She trained as a dentist and later started her own dental clinic.   


She eventually closed that down and started working with Brian.  

Their companies are called Ancestral Supplements and The Fittest.  Their companies imported supplements and meat products from countries like Australia and New Zealand.  These companies were created after their sons had allergies and were frequently in hospital.  Barbara and Brian alleged that after they adopted a primitive lifestyle and began eating uncooked meat, their lives changed.

“We cut out all the processed foods, we cut out all the liquid calories, the seed oils. We just went to whole foods, chiefly liver and bone marrow. Anything that made sense like, Yeah it’s ancestral. Within a couple of days, the rings around their eyes went away,” he said. “They had this new vibrancy, this new energy, this new electricity. You didn’t know they were capable of living like this, with such joy and laughter.”

Brian claims that their businesses bring in more than $100m per year.  

The couple have converted the hot tub on their property into a 36 degree ice plunge pool.  They have also put a sparring ring in their living room for their sons to take boxing classes in.   

The family do not sleep on mattresses – they sleep on hard wooden slats in an attempt to mimic how cave men lived.  

Brian has also told the media that he no longer responds to his birth name because he ‘ripped open a cage and ate Brian Johnson.  I was in New York City and some guy said, Oh my God, it’s Brian Johnson! And I’m like, who the eff is Brian Johnson?” he said.


Brian has said in interviews that when he was growing up, he was a small, weak kid who got pushed around at school.  His father died when Brian was young and he lived with his mother in San Antonio.  He told GQ that here was the time he was in sixth grade, and a guy named Felix hocked a loogie in his hand and smacked Brian in the face. Then the time, a couple of years later, when he came to school with brand new shoes, feeling cool for once, someone stole them from his locker during gym class, and he had to walk home barefoot.

When he was in middle school, he started working out and everything apparently changed for him.  One of his mother’s boyfriends had weights and he started lifting.  He said that when he went to the gym, he felt like he could ‘control all outcomes.’ After he worked on his physique, he said a classmate called him ‘Marky Mark’ and that remark changed his life forever. “ I realized other guys wanted to be like me. And for the first time in my life, girls started to take notice of me.”

Brian started posting about his life and workouts in 2021.  He said it was a ‘very rocky start.’ 

Their main formula seems to have consisted of basically meat and weights.  There is one exercise he posts about called The Barbarian which involves holding a 70 lb (30kg) kettlebell in each hand, strapping 20 lb (9kg) ankle weights on each leg, and also putting 70lbs of weight in a backpack.   And then, you drag 120 lbs of weight on a sled behind you for an entire mile.  


He did the Barbarian across the Brooklyn Bridge in New York in 2022.   He has said that he wants to do exercise at landmarks such as the Great Wall of China as well as the Taj Mahal. 

On Stryker’s 15th birthday, he completed the Barbarian.  Barbara was against it but Brian was furious at her view.  “I was like, I can’t believe you don’t believe in him. I don’t care if he has to go out and it takes him two days. I’ll bring him food. I’ll bring him his pillow. Whatever he’s gotta do, he’s gonna do this thing.’   Stryker completed the exercise in 2 hours.


Journalists have asked Brian about his relationship with his kids.  “Somebody asked me the other day, hey, what if your kids hate you when they grow up? I said I don’t mind. I would rather they hate me than hate themselves.”

In December 2022, the Liver King’s empire possibly started to crumble. 

A YouTuber named Derek who has a channel called ‘More Plates More Dates’ made a video about Brian.  

The video was titled ‘The Liver King Lie’.  The video is an hour long and it goes into emails that Brian had sent to a bodybuilding coach in 2021, before the official launch of the Liver King brand.  In the emails, Brian spoke about his plans to get a million social media followers in a few months by pushing his body to the limit, using human growth hormones.  The hormones were costing him $11,000 per month.  


After this video was released, Brian made his own video where he admitted that he did in fact use steroids.  

“Before social media, I was rich and anonymous and after social media, I’m still rich, but no longer anonymous. I never expected this kind of exposure,” he says. 


“Yes, I’ve done steroids. And yes, I’m on steroids, monitored and managed by a trained hormone clinician.”

Brian also wrote a message to Rolling Stone about the situation.  “In a weird way, I’m grateful for the recent events that have shed light on this complicated-as-fuck topic,” he continued.


By the end of December 2022, a $25 million class action lawsuit had been filed in New York against Brian.  

The suit names Brian as well as two of his supplement companies: Ancestral Supplements and workout-focused The Fittest. The former offers products like MOFO: Male Optimization Formula, while the latter sells The Fittest Liver King Bar.

“This action arises from an elaborate, well-orchestrated marketing and advertising scheme,” reads the suit, alleging Brian deceived and misled “vulnerable and health-conscious consumers.”

The suit calls this approach “cult-like” and “implausible,” while referring to a raw meat diet as “dangerous and life-threatening.” 

The suit continues: “Liver King’s ongoing denial of using any steroid or other performance-enhancing drug, and misrepresentations concerning his alleged adherence to the ancestral tenets, further induced consumers to trust and rely on the efficacy of the ancestral tenets and purchase the products.”

It is being filed on behalf of anyone who has ordered any of Brian’s products.

The next scammer we are going to discuss is Madison Russo.  Madison is a 19 year old from Iowa who is alleged of faking cancer in order to steal more than $37k from GoFundMe donations.

Madison, known as Maddie, was ballsy.  Wow.  There is an October 2022 article from The North Scott Press in which Maddie goes into detail about her cancer.


It was Thursday, Feb. 10, and Maddie Russo was sitting in her accounting class at St. Ambrose University. Her cell phone buzzed, she looked at the screen, and had no idea her life was about to change forever.

Now, a little more than eight months after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, the 2021 North Scott graduate’s world was rocked to its very core.


After learning last week that a football-sized tumor is attached to her spine, Maddie is trying to make sense of what her life is going to look like.

Yes, you read that right. Maddie, a lifelong Eldridge resident, seems to be in the fight of her young life, and she’s just 19 years old.

“Life has been crazy,” she said last week. “It’s like a Catch-22. I can’t win for losing. I feel like I’ve been rocked to my soul, and right now, everything is kind of uncertain. I just want to know my game plan, and right now, I don’t know what that is.

“Of course, every day can’t be sunshine and rainbows, but you can’t just choose to be mad at the cancer. It just happens to people. If you stay depressed, and in a dark space, I feel like your body will never get better.”

Maddie’s cancer journey began last winter, two years after being diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes, which means the pancreas produces little or no insulin.

In the article, Maddie goes into detail about her symptoms.  She said she felt ‘just a little bit off’ and said she had fevers, bloody stools and nosebleeds.  

She also spoke about getting the test results that showed she had cancer.

“It was early in the morning, and I had been anxiously awaiting these test results,” said Maddie. “My phone rang, and it said, ‘Iowa City Oncology.’ I stepped out of the classroom and took the call.

“They told me they had found a mass on my pancreas, and that I had Stage 2 pancreatic cancer. I was terrified, and I definitely still am. I was in shock. I didn’t think it could be true. I’m so young, and I wondered how this could happen. I went through all the emotions, and I was pretty numb.

“I remember hanging up the phone, and I was a mess. I was literally bawling, but somehow I ended up getting the courage to wipe away my tears and went back into class, which now, when I think about it, was pretty crazy.”

Maddie told the media that she had an 11% survival rate for five years and that had undergone 15 rounds of oral chemo and 90 rounds of radiation.  Miraculously, her tumor shrank and responded to treatment but then she was diagnosed with leukaemia.


Despite all of this, she managed to finish the semester with a 3.85GPA, as well as get an internship. 

“They gave me a slim 11-percent survival rate for five years before this latest tumor was discovered,” she continued. “Eleven percent. At 19 years old, I don’t know if I will live to see the day I graduate from college, get married, or become a mom. In the meantime, I will fight.”

She also spoke about support she received, including from the Ohl Strong Foundation, which was established in memory of Dr. Brent Ohl, by his wife, Peggy, after he lost a battle with pancreatic cancer in 2016.

“We’ve always known Peggy (Ohl),” said Maddie. “She and my dad shared the same birthday and grew up together. When Peggy found out about me, she immediately reached out, and I received a whole package of support materials, including $500 in gift cards.


“Immediately, I was overwhelmed with what the foundation gave. It was nice to know somebody in the community was actively advocating for a cure, and I know since they went through it firsthand with Brent, it was important to them to turn their hardship into helping other people.”

So this article is from October 2022.  By January 2023, Maddie’s lies had been exposed.

At 6pm on January 11, police received a report that said Maddie had taken money from more than 439 donors, which included businesses, local cancer foundations and private citizens.  By January 19, a GFM for her had raised $37303.

Police learned that Madison had been a guest speaker for several events under false pretences.  

She had also posted photos on social media of medical equipment on her body.  Medical professionals saw the images and came forward to report the ‘terrible life-threatening inaccuracies’ of the placement of the equipment.  The photos had also been taken inside Maddie’s apartment and not in a medical facility.

She had a TikTok that has now been deleted but in the clip she spoke about how she had been able to not lose her hair.  “It just comes down to my brand of chemo, which is oral chemo,” she said in the video. “I got really lucky with that.

Maddie is also accused of stealing photos from the social media of cancer patients and passing them off as her own.  


Police looked into her medical records and found that she was never treated for any cancer or tumors.  

Court records show police seized multiple items from Maddie’s apartment, including:

A gray 2023 Kia Sportage

A brown paper bag with medical supplies

Bank records

An IV pole with a feeding pump filled with cotton balls

2 boxes of transparent dressing

A wig

Cash

Pills for nausea in the name of a relative

After all this came out, GoFundMe released a statement:

“GoFundMe has a zero-tolerance policy for misuse of our platform and cooperates with law enforcement investigations of those accused of wrongdoing.


“GoFundMe’s Giving Guarantee offers donors a full refund in the rare case when something isn’t right; this is the first and only donor protection guarantee in the fundraising industry. Donors can file a claim here: hwww.gofundme.com/contact/suggest/donor.”

Maddie was arrested on January 23, 2023 for theft by means of deception, a class C felony, according to an Eldridge Police Department press release. Iowa law states that a class C felony is punishable by up to 10 years in jail as well as fines ranging between $1,000 and $10,000.

She was released on $10k bond and her arraignment was set for March 2 at 11am.   

In early February, police seized over $33k from the bank accounts of Maddie and a family member named Peggy Russo. 

Lindsay Marie Musgrove was born in 1990 – I believe she grew up in Wallingford, CT.  Her parents are Mike and Paula Musgrove.

Neighbors have since spoken about the Musgrove family.  “Her parents are wonderful people. They’re very nice.”

Lindsay attended Lyman Hall High School in Wallingford, Connecticut.  In her yearbook she wrote, “No matter how hard you fight it, you fall. And it’s scary. Except there’s an upside to free falling. It’s the chance you give your friends to catch you.”

She then went on to graduate from Quinnipiac University in Hamden in 2012 with a bachelor’s degree in biology.  She had been working as labor and delivery registered nurse at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.  She had previously worked as a nursing assistant at South Shore Hospital in South Weymouth, Mass.


Lindsay married Patrick Clancy in 2016 in Southington, CT.  The couple settled in Duxbury, Mass and had three children together.   Cora was 5, Dawson was 3 and the baby Callan was 8 months old.   They bought the house they were living in at the time of the incident in 2018.  

By all accounts, Lindsay was a doting mother.  For Christmas photos, she dressed the kids in matching outfits.  She posted a ton of pics of the kids on her social media.


“She was always working out and going everywhere with her kids,” says Michelle Connor, 32, who was on the cheerleading team with Lindsay at Quinnipiac College.

“She was that mom that you always wanted to be,” Connor says.


“I feel like the luckiest mama in the whole wide world,” Lindsay wrote in a social media post. In a later post she said: “So unbelievably thankful for this family and life.”

After Lindsay gave birth to Callan, she struggled with her mental health.  Reports say that she did not experience these issues after the births of her first two children.  

Six weeks after the birth, Lindsay shared a post on facebook about how she felt “dialed in” again.

Lindsay posted that she was focusing on exercise, nutrition and her mindset — noting “it has made all the difference.” 

Lindsay’s condition worsened.  At the time of the incident, she had been receiving treatment through an intensive outpatient program.  

Her defence attorney Kevin Reddington has spoken about the treatment she was receiving.  

“She consulted with a number of doctors who indicated that she would be able to sleep, she would be able to feel, she would be able to emote once these medications kicked in.”

In terms of ‘these medications’, Lindsay had been prescribed a mixture of SSRI antidepressants, or specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors, benzodiazepines and antipsychotic and antiseizure drugs in the months leading up to the killings. These included Prozac, Zoloft, Trazodone, Seroquel, Amitryptiline, Remeron, Valium, Klonopin, Ativan and Lamictal.


Her case notes indicate that she was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder. She was then evaluated in December when a psychiatrist said she did not have postpartum depression.

Assistant District Attorney Jennifer Sprague spoke about journal entries that Lindsay kept regarding her treatment.  “She detailed that she had difficulties with each of the medications that were prescribed to her. When she had issues with a medication, her doctor had her stop it or wean off it and then try something else.”

“She was never on more than four to five medications at a time, and at the time of the murders, she was taking three medications. She always took medications as prescribed.”

Lindsay kept regular notes on her phone.  In October 2022, she wrote:

“I think I sort of resent my other children, because they prevent me from treating Cal like my first baby. And I know that’s not fair to them. I know that. I was feeling so depressed last evening when Cora and Dawson came home from school. I know it runs off on them, so we had a pretty rough evening. I want to feel love and connection with all of my kids.”


In December 2022, Lindsay told Patrick that she was having thoughts of suicide and thoughts about hurting her children.  She contacted her psychiatrist and then admitted herself to a mental health facility from Jan. 1 to Jan. 5.  Later in January, Lindsay told Patrick that she was no longer having suicidal thoughts.  

Around this time, Patrick spoke to a friend and said that he wanted to become more involved with his wife’s treatment “due to the fact that Lindsay was going by herself to a psychiatrist for a while and he felt that she was prescribed too many medications.” 


On January 23, 2023, Lindsay wrote in her phone that she had “a touch of postpartum anxiety” around returning to work.

The day of the incident was January 24, 2023, a Tuesday.  So this was almost 3 weeks after she was released from the mental health facility.   Patrick has said that Lindsay was having a great day.  He said it had been ‘one of her best days.’  “She was smiling and happy and there was no indication that she was going to harm the kids,” DA Sprague said. “No one described her as acting like a zombie in the days leading up to the murders or on the day of the murders.”

I believe Patrick had been working at home regularly in an effort to support Lindsay, so he was around for most of the day.

We will now run through a timeline for January 24:

Lindsay took Cora to a doctor’s appointment in the morning.  When they got home, they played in the snow with Dawson.  Lindsay took some pics and sent them to her mother.

At 4.02pm, Lindsay googled ‘kids miralax’ and also ‘takeout 3v”.  She then used google maps to determine how long it would take to drive from the family home to the ThreeV restaurant – it’s around 5.5 miles from their home, an 11 minute drive.  

At 4.47pm, Lindsay called a CVS in Kingston to ask if they had children’s Miralax.  The manager said that they didn’t but advised Lindsay that they did have similar medications

At 4.53pm, Lindsay texted Patrick who was working in the basement and said ““Any chance you want to do takeout from 3V … I didn’t cook anything … it’s been a long day.”

Patrick texted back, “Yes.” Lindsay asked him to check the menu.

At 5.06pm, Patrick texted to ask her what she was going to order for food. She responded that she’d get the “mediterranean power bowl.” Patrick responded that he wanted the “scallop and pork belly risotto.”

At 5.10pm, Lindsay called ThreeV to order takeout.   She made the order under Patrick’s name.

At 5.15pm, Lindsay texted the words “Pedialax liquid stool softener” to her husband.  Patrick left the home to run the errands.

Patrick was seen on CCTV at CVS on Summer St in Kingston at 5.32pm.  He was seen in the children’s medication aisle.  

At 5.33pm, Patrick called Lindsay.  She didn’t answer but called him back one minute later.  She confirmed the medication that he should buy.  He later told police that it seemed like he had interrupted Lindsay in the middle of something by calling her.


Patrick arrived at the ThreeV restaurant at 5.54pm.  He paid for the food and left.

Patrick arrived home at 6.09pm.  The house was silent.  He called Lindsay to see what was going on.  When she didn’t answer, he went upstairs to their bedroom and the door was locked.  He was able to open it and he noticed blood on the floor as well as a window open.  He ran outside and saw Lindsay was laying on the ground injured.  She had cuts to her neck and wrists.  He then called 911.

Patrick can be heard on the 911 call asking Lindsay ‘Where are the kids?’.  She replied ‘In the basement.”

He asked her ‘What did you do?”  She replied “I tried to kill myself and jumped out of the window.” 

Emergency services arrived at 6.11pm and started tending to Lindsay.  Patrick went back into the home and started searching for the kids.  “Guys?” he called, trying to get them to answer.

When Patrick entered the basement, he began ‘screaming in shock and agony as he found his children.’  He yelled to police ‘She killed the kids.” 

Each child had an exercise band around their necks.  The bands had been tied to strangle them.  Cora and Callan were found on the floor of a den area in the basement.  Dawson was alone on the floor in Patrick’s office.  

“He frantically removed the bands from around their necks and begged them to breathe,” Assistant District Attorney Jennifer Sprague said.

The scene was said to be the worst that some of the first responders have ever seen.  Town Manager Rene Read said “I know a little bit of what they go through, but when they tell me it’s the worst they’ve ever seen, it’s going to have an impact.” 

Lindsay was taken to South Shore Hospital in Weymouth with broken bones in her back and ribcage – these injuries have left her paralyzed below the waist.

The children were sent to Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital in Plymouth.  Callan was soon after med-flighted to Boston Children’s Hospital.

At 7.28pm, Cora and Dawson were pronounced dead.

Callan’s condition was listed as critical.  He died from his injuries three days later, January 27.


Lindsay spoke on the phone to Patrick on February 6. She told him that she heard voices and had a “moment of psychosis” after he left the house on Jan. 24. He asks her what voices she heard, and she tells him she heard a man’s voice telling her to kill the kids and kill herself, because it was her last chance. Patrick later told police that his wife had never heard voices or used the word “psychosis” with him before.

On February 7 , Lindsay was arraigned from her hospital bed.  She was charged with two counts of murder, three counts of strangulation or suffocation and three counts of assault and battery with a dangerous weapon. Not guilty pleas were entered on her behalf and a probable cause hearing was scheduled for May 2.  Additional charges, including ones related to Callan’s death are likely to be added, officials said.


Lindsay “is a danger to herself and others,” DA Sprague said. “She planned these murders, gave herself the time and privacy needed to commit the murders, and then strangled each child in the place where they should have been safest — their home. She did so with deliberate premeditation and extreme atrocity and cruelty.”

DA Sprague said that Lindsay had been coherent at the time of the murders.  She said that Lindsay deliberately searched online for a restaurant that was far enough away that she would have time to kill each child.  It would have taken each child between 4-6 minutes to die from ligature strangulation, according to the DA.

“She could have changed her mind at any point during that time and removed those bands from their necks and she did not,” DA Sprague said. “She used Apple Maps to make sure she would have enough time to strangle each child before her husband returned from where she had sent him.”

Linday’s defense attorney Kevin Reddington said that the deaths were a ‘product of mental illness.’

He told the court that the 13 psychiatric medications that Lindsay had taken may have caused her to have suicidal and homicidal thoughts.  He told the court she suffered a psychotic break.

Lindsay was prescribed “some pretty heavy medications,” he told PEOPLE. “It was a toxic soup.”

Calling Lindsay “overmedicated,” Kevin said that during the time that she was being prescribed these medications, “They both would go back to the doctor, and then they would tell her to get off the [medicine] and start up on something else,” he says.

“They didn’t even get her to wean off of it before starting her on something else,” he says. “If that didn’t work, they’d change it.

“It went like that into January.”

“Our society fails miserably in treating women with postpartum depression, or even postpartum psychosis,” Kevin said. “It’s medicate, medicate, medicate. Throw the pills at you, and then see how it works. If it doesn’t work, increase the dose or decrease the dose, then end up trying another combination of medications.” 

He said that Lindsay was  “a beautiful person who was thoroughly destroyed by these medications,” he said.

Lindsay has suffered severe spinal injuries as a result of jumping out of the window.  

An email from Linday’s trauma surgeon was included in the court filings.  According to that, she suffered several severe spinal fractures, including a spinal cord transection, from the 20-foot fall. The surgeon said she is not expected to recover, “which would make her paraplegic,” or unable to move her legs or feel anything below her belly button, the email stated.


She also has rib fractures on both sides and cervical spine fractures, “which will necessitate wearing a collar around her neck” to prevent further injury,” according to the email.

“She is nearing readiness to leave the hospital, but will have continued, extensive rehabilitation needs, specifically with respect to (the) spinal cord injury.  She will require specialized spinal cord rehabilitation so she can be taught to self-care for bodily function and use her upper body strength for wheelchair mobility’, the email stated.


A judge agreed that Lindsay could be released to another facility once she was discharged from hospital.  This new facility will provide specialised treatment for her spinal injuries.

There is an 87 page document that has been released which is made up of letters of support for Lindsay. 

“We do very little to concretely help a mother who is suffering with postpartum depression, and when it comes to postpartum psychosis, we fail completely,” a nursing colleague said. “Lindsay and her loving husband Pat, were desperately seeking help and were betrayed by an inadequate medical system that has not devoted enough resources nor time learning how to help our new mothers.”

A GoFundMe was also created.  This is the info from the fundraiser:

On behalf of the extended Clancy Family we invite you to offer support for Patrick as he navigates an unimaginable tragedy. We appreciate your thoughts, prayers, and outreach in support.

This GoFundMe is intended to help Pat pay for medical bills, funeral services, and legal help. This assistance is especially needed because Pat will be unable to work for the foreseeable future as he weathers this painful, life-altering tragedy.

We all know Pat to be the most kind and genuine person. As someone who is always willing to support others, we sincerely thank you for offering yours.

Four days after the murder, on January 28, Patrick posted this update on the GFM.  It is long but I think it’s important that we run through it in its entirety.

‘Thank you all for your love and support. The warmth I’ve received from the community is palpable and your generosity gives me hope that I can focus on some sort of healing. I’ve seen all of your messages and contributions, including some from people I haven’t seen in over a decade and many I’ve never met. I see and appreciate everyone of you.

A lot of people have said they can’t imagine and they’re right, there’s absolutely nothing that can prepare you. The shock and pain is excruciating and relentless. I’m constantly reminded of them and with the little sleep I get, I dream about them on repeat. Any parent knows, it’s impossible to understand how much you will love your kids until you have them. The same goes for understanding the devastation of losing them. Cora, Dawson, and Callan were the essence of my life and I’m completely lost without them.

My family was the best thing that ever happened to me. I took so much pride in being Lindsay’s husband and a dad to Cora, Dawson, and Callan. I always reminded myself that each day with them was a new gift. Callan usually woke up first and would rest his head on my shoulder for a few minutes as he adjusted to morning. Dawson typically sang or spoke his thoughts out loud for a while before we’d go get him. Cora was a big girl and would simply walk downstairs. I can still vividly picture her coming into the living room each morning with her hair in a mess, smile on her face. We always started our days together, reading books, cuddling up on the couch, and playing with magnet tiles. I loved taking them places, whether it was scooting at Chandler elementary, vacation, skiing, out on the boat, or to Duxbury Beach, one of our favorite places on earth. They gave me purpose and I never took it for granted. There is now a massive void where that purpose once was.

Cora had an infectious laugh and was stunningly beautiful. She was the cautious one, but it was really because she was so caring. She used to say she wanted to be a doctor and a mama when she grew up and she would practice by giving Callan check ups. If she was leaving the house to go somewhere, she would pick someone to take care of Caroline and Charlotte, her baby dolls. She had all the doll accessories available, so her sitters were well-equipped. Before she turned 2, she was already wrapping them in perfect swaddles. We would tell her she’s such a “good little mama.” She loved all babies, both real and pretend. She loved sloths, unicorns, tea parties, going to lunch with Nana and Grandpa, and giving presents to people. She knew everything about princesses, her favorite being Sofia the First. She truly loved her brothers and us and said it often in her sweet voice. We did a lot of father-daughter activities together, like skiing and visiting San Francisco or just talking. I loved her, my first born, so much.

Dawson had beautiful, bold, brown eyes that beamed with friendship. He was naturally humorous and generous beyond the norm of a typical toddler, always willing to share his toys with others. For all the love he received, he always gave back more. His best quality was his pure kindness. He loved trucks, tractors, dinosaurs, Paw Patrol, “worker guys” and being outside. He was adventurous and mischievous and enjoyed causing trouble, which he typically found hilarious. He was also remarkably smart. We always said if we didn’t save enough for retirement, it’ll be ok – we’ll just live in Dawson’s guest house. He would hug me tighter than most adults and every night he told me in consistent words at bedtime, without fail, “goodnight dada, I love you.” We had a special bond from day 1. He was my buddy, my first boy, and truly a gift.

Callan was our easy going child. I always said it was because he was the third child – he had to adapt and he did easily. He was born with hardly any fuss and was by far our best sleeper. He was just an incredibly happy and vibrant baby, constantly smiling. Our nickname for him was “Happy Callan.” He was sitting on his own and you could tell he was enjoying his growing independence as he would grab any object within reach. Sometimes he joined my Microsoft calls in the background, playing in his jumpy. I would keep my camera on, too proud to leave it off. He started saying “Dada” whenever I walked in the room. The last moment we had together was our routine. I would come up from my office at the end of the day and swing him between my legs while he laughed and smiled. If I was ever having a bad day, Callan always knew how to heal me. Perhaps that’s why he held on a little longer – to spare me whatever pain he could. As excruciating as it was, I was fortunate and grateful to feel his warmth until his very last moment. Faith is my only hope of believing he felt mine.


Callan died with enormous courage despite being so little. Maybe it was his way of demonstrating what I need to do to press forward. I’ll always try to draw inspiration from him. He’ll always be my little hero.

I want to share some thoughts about Lindsay. She’s recently been portrayed largely by people who have never met her and never knew who the real Lindsay was. Our marriage was wonderful and diametrically grew stronger as her condition rapidly worsened. I took as much pride in being her husband as I did in being a father and felt persistently lucky to have her in my life. I still remember the very moment I first laid eyes on her and can recall how overcome I was with the kind of love at first sight you only see in movies. It really didn’t take long before I was certain I wanted to marry her. We said “I love you” to each other multiple times daily, as if it were a reflex. We habitually started every morning with a passionate hug, yielding a sigh of relief like we had each received the perfect medicine. If too much time passed with out a hug, she’d look at me and ask, “did you forget?” We mutually understood the reality that people can have bad days, but we stuck to the rule that when one of us got lost, the other was always there to bring them home, always. She loved being a nurse, but nothing matched her intense love for our kids and dedication to being a mother. It was all she ever wanted. Her passion taught me how to be a better father.

I want to ask all of you that you find it deep within yourselves to forgive Lindsay, as I have. The real Lindsay was generously loving and caring towards everyone – me, our kids, family, friends, and her patients. The very fibers of her soul are loving. All I wish for her now is that she can somehow find peace.


I promise I’ll put all my energy into healing and rediscovering my purpose. I owe that to all of you, Duxbury fire and police, our compassionate healthcare workers, our local faith leaders, the Microsoft community, and especially Cora, Dawson, and Callan. I don’t know how or when I’ll be able to do it, but your love and generosity will help me get started. I know that love always wins.

Cora, Dawson, and Callan, you gave me so much in your short time here. I don’t know if the pain will ever go away, but I’ll do my best to carry on in your honor. Dada loves you so much and will always remember you.

With love and endless gratitude’

Nicola is a 45 year old woman from Lancashire in England.  Her family have said that her nickname is Nikki.

Nicola’s parents are Ernest and Dot and she has a sister, Louise.  Nicolas was born in Essex but moved to Lancashire around 25 years ago.   Nicola’s partner is Paul Ansell.  They met 12 years ago, after Nicola’s first marriage fell apart.  They have two daughters together – Harriet, 9, and Sophia, 6.

Nicola posted a lot on social media.  Just weeks before she vanished, the family went on a holiday to Center Parcs.  She posted some pics of Elf on the Shelf antics from their holiday.  


Nicola was working as a self-employed mortgage and protection adviser at the time she disappeared.  The family also have a Springer Spaniel dog, Willow.


You can view Nicola’s Facebook pages here and here:


The day Nicola disappeared was January 27, 2023, a Friday.


There is a pretty comprehensive timeline of her last confirmed movements.

Nicola left home at 8.26am.  She dropped children off at school and had a chat with another parent for around 15 minutes.  At 8.43am, she went for a walk on path by the River Wyre.

https://youtube.com/shorts/taQrLasvL6g?feature=share

Nicola apparently used to talk this route for a walk regularly.  On average, it’d take her about 30 minutes to complete the loop and return to her car, which her family say she parked in the same spot about ‘1000 times over’ through the years.


She had actually made a social media post from the same area in November 2022.



8:50am (approximately) – A dog-walker – somebody who knows Nicola – saw her walking around the lower field with her dog. Their two dogs interacted briefly before the witness left the field via the river path

8.53am – Nicola sent an email to her boss

At 9.01am – Nicola logged into a Teams call.  She had her camera off and audio muted.


9.10am (approximately) – A witness – somebody who knows Nicola – saw her on the upper field walking Willow. 

9.30am – The Teams call ended but Nicola stayed logged on.

Just five minutes later, at approximately 9.35, Nicola’s mobile (cell) phone was found by another dogwalker on a bench (see below) by the river.  Willow was also nearby.    The phone was still connected to the Teams call and Willow’s leash and harness were nearby.


I have read that the dogwalker recognized Willow but wasn’t sure who her owner was.  This person called her own daughter who knew the dog belonged to Nicola.  They then called Nicola’s partner Paul to let him know of the situation.  I believe this was at around 10.50am. 

‘I got a call from the school regarding somebody who had found Willow, Nikki’s phone and the dog lead and harness on the bench,’ Paul said.

‘We take the kids to school and take the dog down there – either myself or Nikki – nearly every day.’

When no trace of Nicola could be found, police started searching for her that day.

It was confirmed quickly that Willow was dry when she was found (indicating she hadn’t fallen into the river) and also that Nicola could swim.  


Nicola’s family have said that she was in good spirits at the time.  She had recently secured a new client at work and was excited about that.  She had spoken to her sister the night before she disappeared about a spa visit they had coming up.  They had discussed what treatments they were going to get.

The following day, January 28, Lancashire Constabulary started using drones, helicopters and police search dogs to search for Nicola.  

A mountain search and rescue team, as well as an underwater search team were also engaged. 

There was a seemingly abandoned house in the area that was also searched to no avail.

On January 29, local residents held a meeting at the village hall around 10.30am to organise searches, one in the morning and one in the afternoon.  Over 100 people turned up to help, including Nicola’s partner Paul.

Police urged volunteers to exercise caution, describing the river and its banks as “extremely dangerous” and saying that activity in these areas presented “a genuine risk to the public”.

Volunteer searchers were told to move up river, while professionals moved downstream.

Again, no trace of Nicola was found.

On January 30, Superintendent Sally Riley from Lancashire Constabulary said police were “keeping a really open mind about what could have happened.’  They said at this point that they were not treating Nicola’s disappearance as suspicious and that there no signs of foul play.  

Supt Riley said there was no evidence of any criminal activity or that Nicola has been attacked.

On January 31, police spoke to a witness who had also been walking his dog in the area at the time.  He is understood to have lived locally and been a regular on the route, but had not seen Nicola on the day she vanished.

Her family released a statement saying they had been “overwhelmed by the support” in their community, and that her daughters were “desperate to have their mummy back home safe”.


On February 1, Nicola’s parents spoke to the media about the horrific situation.  Her father said: “We just dread to think we will never see her again, if the worst came to the worst and she was never found, how will we deal with that for the rest of our lives.”


They said they had urged the police to reconsider whether Nicola may have been abducted or attacked, but were told this was unlikely.


On February 2, Lancashire Constabulary spoke with a second witness who they had identified with the help of the public using CCTV but they told police they did not have any further information to aid their inquiry.

Police kept searching the water and the area where Nicola’s phone was found.  

Nicola’s family were interviewed on TV, with her sister appealing for anyone with information to come forward and “get my sister back”.

On February 3, police confirmed that their main theory was that Nicola had fallen into the water.  Supt Riley said it was “possible” that an “issue” with her dog may have led her to the water’s edge and urged the public to look out for Nicola’s clothing.

This would possibly explain why Nicola left her phone on the bench.  Maybe the dog was yelping for example and she put it down to go and see what was happening, and she fell into the river.

The following day, Nicola’s sister made a post about that possibility.  She urged the public “keep an open mind” as there is “no evidence whatsoever” Nicola went in the water.

Police also appealed for a person who was seen pushing a buggy/pram to come forward as they believed she may be a key witness.

On February 5, that person came forward. Police said that they were “very much being treated as a witness” as it warned against “totally unacceptable” speculation and abuse on social media.

Private underwater forensics firm Specialist Group International (SGI) offered their services free of charge after speaking to Nicola’s family.

The police agreed to draft them in to start the following week – February 5 was a Sunday.

The SGI search started February 6, Monday.  SGI chief Peter Faulding told the Mirror his high tech sonar equipment would find Nicola in under an hour if she fell into the water by the bench.  Nothing was found.


Police gave another update on February 7.  Superintendent Sally Riley said river searchers were now spreading out towards the sea at Morecambe, but reiterated that police do not believe there was any foul play involved in the disappearance.


She said despite over 500 pieces of information currently being reviewed, investigators are yet to find anything conclusive.

On February 8, SGI pulled out of the search for Nicola. They said they were “100 percent” confident that she is not in the immediate stretch of water from the bench after trawling several miles over two days.  

Mr Faulding said the case is “baffling” but was glad his team hadn’t found a body as it meant Nicola may still be alive somewhere.

The search for Nicola continued on February 9 in the sea at Morecambe.  The police said there are currently no further press conferences scheduled as things stand.

An article about a ‘tatty red van’ in the area came out on this day.  This info is from the Mirror:

It has now emerged that a concerned resident spotted a suspicious-looking vehicle, believed to be a Renault, outside a barn in St Michael’s on Wyre, Lancashire, on January 27.

The witness contacted the police to report a suspicious “red van” parked in the village close to where Bulley went missing.

The 55-year-old witness, who had not been named, told the Times they saw the “tatty red van in Hall Lane outside a barn”.

“I didn’t think anything at the time, but when I saw Nicola had gone missing, I called 101 and spoke to an operator.

“I contacted the police again on Friday and spoke to a police officer. It could have been a Renault van.”

The St Michaels on Wyre resident said the vehicle was the “sort of van you can live in”.

A second witness – who happens to work in in search and rescue in the south of the country – revealed to The Sun that they had seen a red van which “looked suspicious” at 9.40am that morning.

The man, who requested not to be named, said they had called the police three days after she was revealed missing when they realised that the vehicle “might be significant” in their inquiries.

“They thanked me and asked if I had any dashcam footage and told me they were taking my information seriously”, he added.

Lancashire Police have since come out though and said there is “nothing to suggest” the red van is suspicious.

Along the same lines as the van sighting, locals reported seeing two fishermen who were acting strangely around the time Nicola vanished.  A witness has told police he saw two men acting suspiciously near the route that Nicola went walking on.  He said  they were “trying to hide their faces”.

“It was very strange. It made me uneasy,” the witness told The Sun.

Nicola went missing with her car keys and a water bottle.  Neither have been found.  Her partner Paul apparently asked Mercedes if her keys could be tracked.

“Paul has been clear about Nikki’s keys being missing from the get go,” a source told the media. “In the local searches he specifically asked people to keep their eyes open for them and even organised for people to go out with metal detectors. One of the first things he did was to contact Mercedes to see if they could be tracked.”

Paul has said that Nicola would have had the keys in her coat pocket. He described them as “a couple of Mercedes keyrings on it, one black and one blue, a round wooden key ring with paw prints on it, and a couple of normal keys”.

Police have since said there is a gap in the timeline for this case that they cannot fill in.  Substantial CCTV in the surrounding areas has ruled out that Nicola left the park via the majority of the gates. The path leading to Garstang Lane, however, has proven to be a black spot.

Police have said: “We can say with confidence that by reviewing CCTV, Nicola has not left the field during the key times via Rowanwater, either through the site itself or via the piece of land at the side.

“Also, we can say that she did not return from the fields along Allotment Lane or via the path at the rear of the Grapes pub onto Garstang Road.”


Nicola was last seen by a witness at 9.10 and her phone was found at 9.35.  The Teams call ended at 9.20.  I wonder if she said goodbye or if she had already vanished by then?

By mid February, police said they had opened 500 lines of inquiry in the case and were looking to talk to more than 700 drivers seen in the local area.

On February 15, Lancashire Constabulary gave an update on the case. They reiterated that they believe Nicola went into the river. They also said that they classed her as high risk and that she had vulnerabilities. They also gave the information that Nicola may have been struggling with an alcohol addiction.



On February 19, Nicola’s body was pulled from the River Wyre, around 1 mile from where she is thought to have disappeared.

On Saturday January 7, 2023, police were called to the Crayton home in High Point, North Carolina.  It was 7.05am and two people had run from the house, screaming for help.

When police forced their way into the home, they found five family members dead.


Robert Crayton Jr., 45, fatally shot his wife and three children before dying from a self-inflicted gunshot wound.

The victims were identified as Athalia Crayton, 46, Kasim Crayton, 18, Nyla Crayton, 16 and Nasir Crayton, 10.

The two people who had run screaming from the house was an older adult child of Athalia and Robert, as well as that child’s partner.  


High Point police officers said they had responded to Crayton home five other times since 2014.

Robert had also been involuntarily committed on January 3, 2022.   There is not too much info publicly available about that incident. 


“He was suffering from some mental illness,” High Point police Lt. Patrick Welsh said. “I can’t speak to the reason under the involuntary commitment. But we do believe it was taken out by the family.”

Just as some background into Robert, he was an actor.  According to his imdb page, he played roles including Peachy in Marvel’s “Ant-Man” movie, football star Warren Sapp on NBC’s “Young Rock” as well as roles on HBO’s “Ballers,” Disney’s “Safety” and many more.

Victor Joyner, COO of the Maultsby Talent Agency spoke about his relationship with Robert.

“We first met on set working on a project and remained tight since that period. Even as our career paths went in different directions we stayed in contact,” he said. “He was always a person to get sound advice. When you were down he would always have a word to lift you up.”

“We last spoke before Thanksgiving when I wanted to share some good news with him. He listened to what I had to say, gave me a word of encouragement and stated he was spending time with his wife who he loved dearly,” Victor recalled. “For what I know over the years, he loved his wife and his children. Even when he traveled for work he missed them and if he was hanging with them he would cut our talks short just so he could spend time with them.”

Coco Hillary, a former Appalachian State football player worked on a 2019 movie with Robert,

“We shot that movie before COVID,” Coco said. “The pandemic has affected everyone differently and you never know someone’s circumstances. Mental health is serious.”

The motive for this shooting is still unclear.  


“That’s going to be a piece of the investigation. I’ve expressed this to the family, we may never know why — what goes through the hearts and minds of a person who would do this sometimes dies with him,” Lt Welsh said. “We don’t have any indication right as to the ‘why.’ “

Athalia’s family have issued a statement. 

.Athalia Athena Crayton and her wonderful children; Nasir, Nyla, and Kasim, were a light to everyone they met. Their lives were taken too soon – yet their legacy lives on from the shores of Jamaica to the campus of NC A&T.

Athalia Athena Crayton, 46, is a Jamaican-American whose family originates from Kingston, Jamaica; she grew up in Miami and South Carolina. Athalia or “Art” as she is affectionately called by family and friends also lived in South Korea, Pennsylvania and North Carolina.


Successful in so many aspects of her life – Athalia was a veteran, a Sergeant of the United States Army and served honorably in the Second Infantry Division as a Heavy Equipment Mechanic. In addition, she was a business owner, certified life coach, interior designer, and student at NC A&T University. Most importantly she was a dedicated mother to her children. “Her kind heart spills onto her children who she loves so much that she’ll go through hardship for a season to make sure that her children flourish”, is how her niece described Athalia as a mother.

Athalia poured her heart and soul into everyone she met, which is how she sustained so many friendships over decades. At her core, Art was an amazing mother, committed wife, loving sister, and honorable daughter. She was the “glue, and made every effort to bond together” her entire family. Her brother described her as “an incredible woman, she was everyone’s best friend.”

On January 4, 2023, concerned friends of the Haight family from Enoch, Utah entered their home at 4923 N. Albert Drive.  Inside, they found the bodies of the 8 family members.

Michael Haight (42) was found dead along with his wife Tausha Haight, 40; Tausha’s mother, Gail Earl, 78; and the couple’s children — Macie Lynn Haight, 17; Briley Ann Haight, 12; Sienna Belle Haight, 7; Ammon Haight, 7; and Gavin Drew Haight, 4.

City Manager Rob Dotson said “Evidence suggests that the suspect took his own life after killing seven others in the home.”   The suspect is referring to the father of the family, Michael.


He also said “Many of us have served with them in church, in the community and gone to school with these individuals.

“This community at this time is hurting. They’re feeling loss, they’re feeling pain and they have a lot of questions.”


The night before the bodies were discovered, Tausha and one of her daughters were seen at a church function, according to the city. Tausha had been scheduled to meet up with someone on the morning of January 4, and when she didn’t show up that person called police for a welfare check.  I think that police were in the process of looking into starting the welfare check when the neighbours discovered the bodies.  At the same time that the welfare check call was made, someone made a missing person report for Michael.  His Ford F-150 was found parked at his parents’ residence in Cedar City.

Michael and Tausha had been married for over 20 years.  What we learned since the murder-suicide is that on December 21, 2022, Tausha filed for divorce.

We have also learned that on August 27, 2020, police responded to the Haights’ home after allegations that Michael assaulted Macie, the couple’s oldest daughter, over several years. The allegations also included “a lot of yelling and emotional abuse.”

In a police report, Macie spoke about three instances of alleged physical abuse from her father. She also said Michael would talk about “how stupid and lazy Tausha is” and would take Tausha’s phone in an attempt to “keep her from leaving the house.”

“She stated that there have been several times over the last few years that her father, Michael, has become assaultive with her,” reads the report, where Macie, at the time likely 14 or 15 years old, tells police the first instance of abuse came about three years prior in the family’s piano room.


“Her father became angry at her and grabbed her by the shoulders. He shook her and her head banged into the wooden piece along the back of the couch,” the report reads. “She stated that she was terrified that he was going to hurt her. She stated that she did not suffer any injury from this event. She was mostly scared.”


Two years before the 2020 report, there was another incident where Michael allegedly grabbed his daughter “around the neck and choked her” while they were in the pantry area of the family’s kitchen, the report says.

“She stated that she was very afraid that he was going to keep her from breathing and kill her,” the officer’s report reads. “I asked her if she actually lost her breath. She stated that she did not. She stated that he did not choke her.”


According to the police reports, there was a third incident in the summer of 2020, happened in the family’s garage after they had returned home from a camping trip.

“(Macie) stated that her father became angry with her and had grabbed her by the shoulders and shook her. She stated that she did not sustain any injury,” the report reads.

Michael denied grabbing his daughter in an assaultive manner, shaking her by the shoulders or grabbing her neck. He also said he never belittled his wife.

He did tell police “that he does lose his temper and yell at the kids.”

“Later he stated that if he had indeed done these things it was not meant to be an assault. He stated that Macie is mouthy and he gets angry at her,” the report reads.

At the time, Michael told police he’d had a “tough year” with his father’s death and his brother in the midst of a divorce. He believed Tausha and his soon to be ex-sister-in-law had “been talking and saying mean things about his mother and sister.”

That was Michael’s reasoning behind taking Tausha’s phone, he told police. He also admitted to taking her iPad to work with him for “several days to look at her texts and messages.”

When his wife asked, repeatedly, about the iPad, Michael denied taking it — eventually, he “slipped it back where it would be found at the house.”


“I advised Michael that his behavior was very close to assaultive,” the officer writes in the supplemental report. “I advised him that I did not intend to charge him with any crime at this time. I talked to him about the importance of Macie continuing to speak with a therapist. I asked him to not interfere with that. I also advised him that he should continue seeing someone about his anger. I advised him that I would much rather be having this conversation with him instead of taking him to jail.”

The report concluded with “Tausha indicated that she is in hopes that this case will be a wake-up call for Michael. She stated that she does not believe that criminal charges will be appropriate at this point.” 

There is a comment online that we obviously can’t verify but it seems to run along the same lines as the behaviour in the police report.



Tausha’s family issued a statement about the crime, indicating that Michael had removed all the guns from the house prior to the murder/suicide and that this left Tausha and the kids vulnerable.


In late January, the search warrant for the Haight home was unsealed.  

It is believed that Macie had told a friend that Michael was acting strangely.


“We were also told that one of the daughters texted a friend stating her dad came home, was acting strange, and she was worried.” 

Police took multiple iPhones from the home, including one from Macie’s bedside table.

Another phone was found near Macie’s bed and multiple phones and tablets were located in the master bathroom. A phone that was laying next to Michael was also taken.

“It is probable that these devices will contain evidence as to the timeline of when the homicide took place,” documents state. “It is also probable that there will be evidence of domestic violence related crimes.”

Police also took a gun from the home – “Springfield XDM .40-caliber w/magazine and four rounds”.

On Friday January 13, Tausha was buried along with her mother and children. 


Over 800 people attended their services.  Members of Tausha’s family spoke.

“Nothing meant more to Mom and Tausha than family,” Brett Earl said. “There’s a story of two families, hurt and broken through unthinkable tragedy. However, only a tender, merciful and loving Heavenly Father and God can take this tragedy that has touched us so deeply and reach deep inside each of us and turn it into a miracle (of) healing, growth and progression.”

“I would invite you today to be a little kinder. Be a little nicer, be a little more understanding. That is my prayer,” Darren Earl said.

Not surprisingly really, Michael was not buried with the rest of the family.

Valentina Trespalacios of Bogota was dating an American man named John Nelson Poulos (35) and is the main suspect in her murder.

You can see Valentina’s instagram here.

We will start with some background – we haven’t been able to find too much on Valentina yet but we do know that John was formerly married to Ashley Poulos and they had lived in Texas.  The couple had three children. You can see John and Ashley with their son in this photo:


John’s oldest son Jackson, was only four years old when doctors diagnosed him with stage 4 Rhabdomyosarcoma in his GI tract and abdomen. The cancer is very rare, with only about 350 cases a year in the United States.

In 2017, the child underwent a 13-hour operation in which the surgeon removed more than 150 tumors that were detected in his pelvis, sigmoid colon, appendix, spleen and gallbladder.


At some point, Ashley filed a restraining order against John due to violence.  The couple divorced in 2021.

According to the NY Post, John met Valentina on a dating app around a year ago.  Some other reports say that he had been dating Valentina for around 8 months and had planned to marry her.   I have seen another report that says he first met Valentina in September 2022. He was apparently planning to start a new life in Colombia.

On Saturday January 21, John and Valentina were seen on CCTV together.  Valentina worked as  DJ and the two were seen getting out of a cab.  Valentina could be seen holding John’s hand as they walked toward a DJ booth for her gig at Nexxus nightclub.

Valentina worked and finished her set at around 5am.  She was then seen leaving the office of the nightclub’s owner while John was in the bathroom.

They got another cab to John’s apartment.  He had apparently only moved into it days earlier, on the Friday.  

What happened after the couple got back to the apartment is largely unknown.  We do know that John was seen on Sunday January 22, putting a suitcase into his VW Voyager.  

He drove to the south side of Bogotá, where he tossed the suitcase inside a dumpster next to a park, and drove towards the airport.

His plan to evade police seemed to be purchasing multiple airplane tickets with cash – one from Panamá City to São Paulo, Brazil, and a flight to Istanbul, Turkey, where he would connect to a plane to Montenegro, where there is no extradition treaty with Colombia.


On Sunday afternoon, a person who searching a dumpster for recyclables found the suitcase that John had dumped.  Valentina’s body was inside, with her head sticking out the top. 

An autopsy was carried out for Valentina and her cause of death was determined to be “mechanical asphyxia,” or “strangulation.”

Police moved quickly thankfully, and Panamanian immigration agents and the Interpol arrested him Tuesday night at Tocumen International Airport. This was right before he was about to board his flight to Istanbul.   

When John was arrested, he told authorities that he had fled to Panamá because the Medellín Cartel wanted to kill him.

He told authorities that the cartel was also behind Valentina’s’ murder.

The arrest warrant for John states that he is the ‘alleged perpetrator of causing the violent death of Valentina Trespalacios Hidalgo, who was found in a blue travel suitcase inside a garbage container in the town of Fontibón.’

John is facing four counts – aggravated femicide, concealment, alteration and destruction of evidence.

In John’s mugshot, you can see he has a large scratch on his face:



Veronica Jimiez, a friend of Valentina’s spoke to the media about John’s jealous nature.  He was apparently mad that Valentina refused his demands to go public with their relationship on her social media accounts. She told him that her social network was only to promote her DJ work.

Valentina’s mother Laura Hidalgo spoke to the media and said that John was jealous and possessive.


She also said he had hired a PI to follow her around.  

‘He was the one who hurt my daughter and he doesn’t deserve to be around like if nothing happened. I want justice done. ‘It is not fair that a foreigner comes to excite a Colombian girl and ends up like this. I hope this case does not go unpunished. He was the last person to see her alive and he didn’t have to hurt her.’

John appeared in court on January 26.  The hearing lasted for five hours.  The proceedings were interrupted on several occasions because the court appointed interpreter was having issues properly translating since John is not fluent in Spanish.

John declined a public defender and said that his parents had obtained an attorney for him.

‘They denied me a lawyer in Panama, when I got to the airport I asked to speak to the US Embassy, which took a long time,’ he said during the hearing. ‘Only an hour before the hearing my defense attorney arrived, which is not what a normal person would want in my situation.’

He also complained to the judge that he didn’t feel safe in the Bogotá jail because of the case’s notoriety and demanded additional security.

He appeared in court again on Friday January 27 and we learned some more about what possibly happened on the night of the murder.


Daniel Gómez, the lead prosecutor appointed by the Office of the Attorney General, disclosed that John killed Valentina after he forced her to have sex and then repeatedly struck her body with his fists. He then wrapped his hands around her neck until he strangled her to death.

‘There was a cycle of psychological violence that preceded the crime, which was represented in all the activity of jealousy and control over Valentina’s social life,’ Gómez. ‘You took her life as the result of a jealousy process.’

Daniel also spoke about how John had hired a PI to follow Valentina.

He said it was a ‘behavior that must be understood as violent, given that it affected the physical, moral and psychological integrity of the victim, since it exploited her status as a woman.’ 

It was also explained that if John decided to go to trial, he could be sentenced 500 to 600 months should he be found guilty of murder. He could face up to 48 months in prison for concealment, alteration or destruction of evidence.

However, the prosecution left open an offer that would reduce the sentence to 375 months if he accepted a guilty plea for femicide as well as a reduction of 24 months for the other charge. 

The judge would have to accept the terms of the agreement and John wouldn’t be allowed to back out of it if he agreed.

On January 30, an article by The City Paper Bogota spoke about obstacles that have already arisen in the legal process for this case.

The official translator that we mentioned earlier was forced to resign over her deficient use of the English language.  John claims that his due process is not being facilitated by Colombia’s legal system.

John’s original defence lawyer resigned from the case at this time as a result of constant death threats.  He has now been assigned to Juan Manuel Falla.    The change of defence has been addressed by the Judge:

“The fact that Poulos has not been able to find a trustworthy defense attorney for whatever reasons, either financial, or because he did not find a bilingual lawyer – an implausible situation – the State has guaranteed his technical defense through the public defender’s office,” emphasized the judge.

On February 1, some more info about the case was released by the City Paper Bogota.

We learned that the apartment John and Valentina had been staying at was actually an Air BNB.   John had arrived in Bogota from Atlanta, just 72 hours before the murder.  He caught a cab to the Air BNB and he asked the driver to help him get ‘tusi’” – a synthetic drug known as “pink cocaine.”

We already know that Valentina and John were at the apartment together and went to the nightclub together, arriving home early morning Sunday January 22.


On that day, at 9:12 am, John left the apartment with two black bags believed to belong to Valentina. At 9:51 am, he then entered the apartment with a shopping cart, in which he placed a blue suitcase, partly covered in a grey blanket. The grey blanket is believed to have covered Valentina’s face, given that the entire body did not fit into the suitcase.



Before the suitcase was dumped, it was wrapped in two strands of 3M black duct tape. “It is clear that the disposal of the body was planned, given the long distance from the crime scene, to where the body was identified,” highlighted the investigator. John is believed to have thrown the Valentina’s phone into a grassy field near the airport. The Louis Vuitton-encased cellphone was found by a man searching for his missing car documents. The man handed the phone over to authorities after he matched the opening screen profile of Valentina with photos he had seen in the media.

When John was arrested,a used roll of black industrial tape by the same manufacturer was found in his luggage, as well as a boarding pass to Istanbul on Turkish Airlines, three USB memory sticks and iPad.


John had rented the VW when he arrived in the country and the rental agreement was for a period of three days.  “The suspect only had the intention of staying in Colombia three days,” remarked Miguel Del Río, attorney for Valentina’s family. “The length of his stay in Colombia is contrary to what the victim was led to believe, as well as her family, and friend María Silvana Núñez.

Maria also told the court that Valentina was in love with another man.  She said she was “very much in love with another man,” but her relationship with John “seemed normal.” Santiago Luna, a cryptocurrency “investor”  regularly chatted with Valentina via WhatApp, and sent a last message to her on Saturday. Maria says that John was known on webcam pages as “The Man of the Magic.”

In other key evidence, the Attorney General Office confirmed John “sent Valentina money on a weekly basis, and on one occasion, he found out that she had gone to Aruba. Valentina then asked John to transfer US$1000 via MoneyGram to the account of her friend Maria.

This is a developing story and the blog will be updated.

Bryce Borca


Bryce Borca was 23 when he went missing on October 30, 2022 in Eagan, Minnesota.

What we know is that Bryce had been out with his friends on a party bus and he was reportedly heavily intoxicated.  He and some friends got a Lyft ride – at one point, the driver said that Bryce was so drunk that he attempted to leave the car while it was moving. 

At 2.08am, Bryce and his friends got out of the Lyft at 3256 Hill Ridge Dr. in Eagan.

Bryce’s friends assumed he would walk home to his apartment, which was about 45 mins walk away, and they all went their separate ways.

26 minutes later, at 2.34am, Bryce called his friends and said he didn’t know where he was.  His phone was on 2% charge at this time.

“During that call, Bryce shared his location which put him in the wooded area off Highway 13 (the opposite direction of his apartment.) The 12-minute call abruptly ended and subsequent calls went to voicemail, leading friends to believe Bryce’s phone had died,” Eagan Police Detective Desiree Schroepfer wrote in the affidavit for this case.


According to weather underground, I believe the low that night was around 37 f.

Bryce’s friends started searching the area around Highway 13 on October 30.


The next day, 100 search and rescue professionals and 250 volunteers took part in an organized grid search.

A searcher found a tie which Bryce was believed to be wearing, and another searcher found a pair of shoes, but investigators ruled that the shoes did not belong to Bryce.

Eagan police obtained cell phone records that showed Bryce traveled through a small industrial area near Highway 13 before heading into heavily wooded terrain with several marshes and ponds. Surveillance video from a nearby business showed that Bryce was alone.


Police released the following info about Bryce:

Bryce was wearing a patterned cardigan sweater, black pants and black tie and white sneakers. Several other agencies are assisting in the search which is concentrated near Hwy 13/Yankee Doodle. If you live in the area, please check your properties and businesses.

Police suspended the ground search for Bryce on November 1.


Bryce’s family released this statement in early November:

“This is an incredibly difficult time for us and our main focus is finding our son. Our family would like to thank everyone involved in the search for Bryce, including the Eagan Police Department, county special operations, our friends, family and countless volunteers. We are so very grateful for the outpouring of love and support from the community, and we pray for Bryce’s safe return.” 

According to the Pioneer Press, the police obtained a search warrant for Bryce’s apartment to collect his electronic devices, including his computer and an older phone.  It isn’t known publicly if anything came from that search.

On December 22, 2022, police gave the following update:

“Over the past seven weeks, the Eagan Police Department has continued an active investigation into the disappearance of Bryce Borca. The investigation has included an extensive search of over 1000 acres in coordination with state and federal officials. Additional specialized support has been added through private entities to assist in locating Bryce. The investigation remains open and active, as Bryce has still not been located.”

We actually held off on recording this episode for a little bit, just in case there was an update on Bryce, but as of the end of January 2023, he is still missing.

On Friday January 20, Bryce’s family announced a $30,000 reward for information that leads to his whereabouts. They say in more than two months since the day he disappeared, Eagan Police, along with friends, family and community volunteers, have searched over 1,000 acres of land and water in Fort Snelling Park and surrounding areas. Scores of tips and leads, including surveillance footage from businesses and homes in the area his phone last pinged, have been followed up on. 


“We are devastated by Bryce’s disappearance and miss him every minute of every day,” the family said in a released statement. “We hope this reward will encourage anyone with information leading directly to Bryce’s whereabouts to come forward and contact the Eagan Police Department.”

Dr Bolek Payan

Dr Bolek Payan was reported missing on December 22, 2022 from Leoni Township in Michigan.  He was last seen leaving his workplace, the Henry Ford Jackson Hospital.

Bolek graduated in 2017 from Midwestern University Chicago College of Osteopathic Medicine.  He served his residency and internship with Henry Ford Allegiance Health, where he went on to become a board-certified psychiatrist.

Bolek’s vehicle was at his house but there was no sign of him there.  

There was a bit of a timeline put together based on people who had interacted with Bolek on Thursday December 22.  He dropped his dogs (Mishka and Dottie) off to the dog sitter as per regular arrangement.  He was due to head off to work after that. 


Bolek also had an appointment for an invisible fence to be installed and he cancelled that appointment at 1.33pm on the Thursday.  He said that the dogs had been contained apparently and there was no need for the appointment any more.  

When Bolek did not show up at the dog sitter to collect the dogs that evening, the sitter called Bolek’s ex.  It seems like the two were still somewhat amicable as the ex went to his house to check on him.  That is when she discovered Bolek’s vehicle was there and there was no sign of him.


Nicole Keiser, the dog sitter gave some exact timings to the media:

“Bolek dropped his dogs at 8 a.m. He told us that he was going to pick them up at 6:30, he already fed them, and that he’ll feed them again when he picks them up at 6:30 that night. So for his truck to be here without coming to the house to pick up the dogs that would be out of character. Something happened and I don’t know what.”

The search for Bolek went on for about five days.  Police searched the inside of his home to no avail. They also used drones and K9s to no avail.

At 12.3pm on December 27, investigators searched a pond on Bolek’s property.  This info is from the police press release:

At approximately 12:30 p.m. today (December 27), divers recovered the body of Dr. Payan from a pond on the property near his residence. Yesterday, detectives gained access into the home video camera system, which was password protected, and observed Dr. Payan leave the residence on foot on 12/22/22, in the mid-afternoon. The property had been checked with K-9 dogs, drones and on foot. After not locating anything on land, holes were cut in the ice of a pond on the property yesterday and divers located Dr. Payan’s body under the ice today. Detectives believe Dr. Payan would have been deceased, prior to when he was reported missing, due to the weather conditions on the day that he left his residence and the fact that he was in the water. The Jackson County Medical Examiner’s Office will be conducting an autopsy and toxicology testing, which will aid in further investigating this incident.

We would like to thank the Jackson County Dive Team, Michigan Search and Rescue, J-DART, the neighbors, and the public for their assistance during this incident. Our thoughts are with Dr. Payan’s family and friends.


Police have said that they believe Bolek was dead before he was even reported missing.   So what happened to Bolek?

The two main theories that I have read online are suicide and misadventure.


Bolek seemed to make sure that his dogs were cared for and he tied up loose ends by cancelling the invisible fence appointment.    There are some media reports that say he had been very stressed at work before his death.  Perhaps that coupled with the breakup was too much for Bolek?

As for misadventure, there are online comments that indicate Bolek may have suffered a head injury just prior to his death.



His obituary:

Dr. Bolek Jahan Payan, age 32, of Jackson, Michigan passed away on Tuesday, December 27, 2022. Bolek was born October 22, 1990, in Baltimore, MD to his parents Farhad and Monika Payan. Bolek had many accomplishments in his life but, his biggest one was being called “Dr. Bolek J. Payan. DO”. 

In addition to being a remarkable psychiatrist that was appreciated and respected by his patients, residents and peers, he was also an avid family man who loved to spend time with his family and friends. In his free time he liked being outdoors hiking, camping, kayaking and stargazing. He also enjoyed playing with his dogs Mishka and Dottie and going to concerts.

Bolek was a wise, confident, intelligent, and most generous human being. He was devoted to his duties as son, grandson, and friend. His love for spending time with his family and friends provided endless memories. He will be deeply missed by all who knew him. Bolek is survived by his beloved mother Monika; loving grandmother, Irena and a host of family and friends.

George Musser

George Musser (20) vanished in Stillwater, Minnesota on Christmas Eve 2022.

He had been out at Brian’s bar in Stillwater.

His friend Ally McKay told CBS: “At approximately 1.30am, he came up to the booth I was sitting in with my friends and he was talking to us. And he told us he had to go to the bathroom and then he never returned”.

George was apparently last seen at the bar at 2.10am.


His keys and wallet were found close to the bar and his car remained parked outside. He was wearing a black hat, a grey flannel shirt, and jeans.  The weather that night reached about -4 fahrenheit, but George did not have a jacket with him.

Ally has spoken about how they tried to find him but the bar staff insisted that they leave.  

“We looked for him at the bar’s closing, but Brian’s was persistent that everyone get out, so we left and we had to assume that he had found his way home.”

The search for George started on Christmas Eve and continued into Christmas Day.


Stillwater Chief of Police Brian Mueller told the media that efforts to find George via surveillance footage and cellphone data were unsuccessful, saying that it was “a very difficult situation”.

Police made a press release on Sunday December 25, and said that “there is no other information at this time as this case is still under investigation. We appreciate all the wonderful volunteers that came out on Christmas to help search for George”.

“Our prayers are with all those family and friends that knew and loved George. We ask that you respect the family’s privacy during this difficult time,” police said.

Later that night, George’s body was found in Baytown Township.  

“I am heartbroken to share that the police have found his body. We are trusting the Lord during this horrific time that he has guided George into Heaven. Please pray for our family,” George’s cousin Emily Dalbec said in a Facebook post.

“George, we love you,” said Kent Musser, George’s father. “We all love you and we miss you so, so much.”

George’s case is slightly different as he wasn’t found in a body of water.  Police ruled that he died from cold weather exposure.


“A progression of video footage from traffic and surveillance cameras tracked an individual matching Musser’s description as he traveled alone and on foot, leading from downtown Stillwater towards the area where his body was ultimately located,” the sheriff’s office said.

His body was found around 1.5 miles away from the bar.

An excerpt from George’s obituary:

To know George Musser was to love him.  He had the most wonderful quality of being able to immediately put you at ease with a kind, welcoming word and a sincere, strong, all-encompassing hug.  To say he will be missed doesn’t even begin to express the depth to which he touched the lives of the people he met and knew, and the everlasting impression he made upon them. 

Theodore Egge

Theodore (Teddy) Egge (35) went missing in Marinette County, Wisconsin on Friday January 13, 2023.

Police issued this press release on January 16:

The Marinette County Sheriff’s Office is looking for the public’s assistance in locating Theodore William Egge, a 35-year-old white male. 5’ 11” 190# with blue eyes. He is not in any trouble, we are looking to check the welfare of Theodore.

The Sheriff’s Office is asking anyone with property in this area to check their surveillance and trail cameras for any signs of Theodore.


Theodore was known to be driving a 2007 blue Jeep Liberty with a WI license plate APB9282 on Benson Lake Road near Northway Drive on that day, at around 2:00 p.m.

His car ran out of gas and was found on the side of the road. A local resident said Theodore asked for directions to Athelstane (a small town that was around 9 miles/10 min drive or a 2 hour walk away). Theodore left the area on foot.

A member of the search party for Theodore said that he had gone down that same road in his vehicle about 30 minutes after Theodore ran out of gas, and there was no sign of him.

Theodore was reported missing after his flatmate became concerned. Ted, Theodore’s father said: “He was living with a guy up in this area, and [the guy] contacted [Roxanne] on Saturday afternoon and said he was concerned for Theodore and that he hadn’t seen him,” explained Ted. “That was when Roxanne and I started to be concerned about it as well.”

“We’ve been up here pretty much since the search party, and we’ve been dropping flyers, we’ve been knocking on doors,” said Ted. “We’ve been getting bits of information, and somebody knows something.”

Ted spoke to the media and said that he and Roxanne are “really, really grateful for everyone that has gotten involved in this. Family, friends, strangers, everyone has been really involved, and there’s a lot of great people up here.”

The Marinette County Sheriff’s Office has been working to locate Egge, but deputies have stated the recent snowfall has made things more complicated.

As at the time of recording, Teddy is still missing. Police have now said that he isn’t familiar with the area and doesn’t have a working cell phone.

“The sheriff’s office requests property owners in this area to check their cabins and properties for any possible signs of Theodore being present or passing through their properties,” a statement reads.

“Please check any game cameras or security cameras. We would also request all outdoor enthusiasts be vigilant while out and about in the wooded areas. We also ask any citizens who have had family or friends in the area over the last week to please reach out and advise them of the search for Theodore and to contact us if they’ve seen him.”

There is no indication of foul play, deputies said, adding that it is highly unlikely he was picked up by a motorist.
