These weeks just after the calendar turns from one year to the next are the perfect time to think about your goals for the coming gardening season. On this week’s podcast, I discuss plotting out plans for doubling down on what worked well in the garden while also deciding on what I want to stop doing and identifying new things that I’d like to give a try.


Last week, I discussed my 10 garden lessons from 2022, and now I am shifting gears from looking back to forging ahead. There are things that I have experimented with in recent years to varying degrees of success, and I want to take those lessons and move forward, refining and enhancing the methods that worked for me. I always want to continue spending more time in the garden just observing and monitoring, which is something I had amazing success with last year.

[NAME] with just harvested onions
There is so much I am looking forward to doing in 2023, including repeating and doubling down on gardening practices that were great successes to trying new and promising methods.

Before getting into it, I want to take a second to remind you that I have a new book out, “The Vegetable Gardening Book: Your complete guide to growing an edible organic garden from seed to harvest.” It’s chock full of insider tips and new-to-you information that will help you step up your gardening game and tackle challenges. 

The Things I Want to Keep Doing
As long as I’ve been gardening — which is a very long time at this point — I’ve settled in on the things that I know work, and I’ve formed habits from those. I’ve pretty much culled all the things that just never really worked out for me so I’ve really settled in over a period of time to a nice consistent process of what I would call “best practices.” 

Making sure that you’ve sited your plants in the proper growing environment is a big one that I can never stress enough — the right plant in the right place. A few other of the more obvious things I recommend are taking great effort to make the best soil possible, mulching, watering at the soil level rather than from overhead, and proactively conducting pest and disease management. 

In addition to these long-practiced fundamentals of good gardening, there are some practices that I have adopted in recent years and found great success with, starting off with visiting my garden as often as possible. It’s said that a gardener’s shadow is the best fertilizer. The fact is a garden performs so much better when the gardener is out there identifying issues early and confronting them before they become irreversible problems. 

One of the things I’ve found over the years with talking to many, many gardeners is that they get so ambitious, really go all in, and overdo it. It’s easy to fall into this trap when, at the beginning of the year, we have cabin fever and make grand designs for our gardens that ultimately prove to be more than we can manage.

For gardeners who are really new, what they soon learn is that there are limitations on how much we can handle in a certain size garden over the time that we have to do it. 

Plants that we’ve set up for success (by following the fundamentals I mentioned above) will take off, but that can also lead to becoming overwhelmed. But one of the ways that we can not allow that to happen, even if we do overplant, is get out there fast enough to realize, ‘oh my gosh, this is getting ahead of me’ and take preemptive actions sooner rather than later so that it really doesn’t become debilitating to the point that you are frozen in your tracks because you don’t even know what to do next 

If I could only give one piece of advice to gardeners — other than spend a lot of time improving your soil — it would be to get out into your garden as often as you can. 

I recognize that based on our schedules and our lifestyles, that’s not always easy. It may be that you can only get out there once a week — but if that’s the case make sure you really do make it out there once a week.

On the flip side, if you’re able to get out there every day or even more than once a day, then you should do that. Not only will spending time in the gardener be pleasurable, but you’ll also be less likely to ever feel overwhelmed. When you stay on top of the changes that happen literally every day, the work will never pile up on you and you’ll have fewer issues with pests, diseases and weeds.

 

[NAME] lamp's inspecting plants
In 2022 I was out in my garden far more often than my schedule usually affords. In 2023, I plan to be out there as much as I can, observing and monitoring my garden and taking proactive steps when an issue arises to ensure a great harvest.

 

Remember Important Sowing and Planting Dates.
I missed two key planting times last year because of my busy schedule. In the spring, I got too late of a start on getting my cool-season crops in, so they did not mature before it got too hot. Then in the fall, several of my crops did not have time to mature before it got too cold. Those are windows of opportunity that I don’t want to miss again. 

This time of year, when the pressure is off and there is time to think and plan, think about what you’ll be planting this year and determine how early you need to start seeds indoors and transplant seedlings outdoors. Be cognizant of your first and late frost dates and the days to maturity for each variety you intend to grow.

Think Outside the Garden Box
How much room do you have to grow in? It may be more than you think. Without investing a lot of money or clearing more land, you can create new growing space using grow bags and straw bales. Both options make it easy to squeeze in more crops.

Outside of the defined area where you typically plant, identify other areas that may not get as much sun as your main garden but could still be suitable for planting. Place some grow bags or straw bales, and you’re off to the races. 

Gardening in areas that aren’t already fenced off risks attracting browsing deer, which is exactly what happened to me, but all it took was putting up three strands of fishing line on posts around the plants to repel the deer.

 

a grow bag and straw bales planted with tomatoes in front of a cattle panel trellis.
Grow bags and straw bales make it easier to garden in new places.

 

Practice Winter Sowing
Whether you sow native flower seeds in containers under wire mesh for protection like Heather McCargo or use the traditional method with milk jugs, you should try winter sowing this year.

Last year was the first time I had really gone all in with Heather’s method, and that is definitely something I’m going to keep doing because I’m really keen on filling my landscape beds with as many native perennials as I can. I’ve got a lot more room to go, but at the same time, I don’t want to break the bank buying those perennials when I can raise them myself simply for pennies on the dollar. Plus, it’s fun, and it’s a great project if you’re trying to get your kids involved.

 

Winter sowing
Winter sowing native seeds is practically a “set it and forget it” method of propagating native plants.

 

Water with a Handheld Wand
If you have the time to be in your garden often anyway, consider using a handheld watering wand as opposed to sprinklers or drop irrigation. 

Overhead watering with sprinklers can promote disease growth but it’s better than nothing. If you water this way early in the morning, there is less disease risk for the plants, but you’ll still be losing a lot of that water to evaporation. The best way to deliver water to where it is needed — the soil — is to use a watering wand. 

I am a big believer in drip irrigation, which is very targeting and efficient, but using a watering wand has a benefit that drip irrigation can’t match: When you stand there for 30 seconds watering a plant, you are face to face with that plant, and you take in the health of the plant and the presence of pests and diseases. 

Using a watering wand is very zen. If you’ve done it, you probably know what I mean. If you haven’t, then I just suggest you try it and see if you feel the same way. 

 

[NAME] [NAME] using watering wand
Using a watering wand delivered water just where it’s needed, but I also like it because it makes me pause and observe my plants for 30 seconds or so. In this brief time, I observe any signs of stress that need to be addressed.

 

Keep Growing Dwarf Tomato Plants
Dwarf tomato plants are just like a tasty indeterminate heirloom tomato, except they grow at about half the rate and are about half the size. The fruit on a dwarf plant is still the same size as your favorite conventional indeterminate heirloom tomato.

It’s a really neat way to grow your favorite tomato plants or similar varieties if you want something that doesn’t take up as much room, doesn’t require as much support, and in fact, is easier to maintain. I have found in my experience with many of the dwarf tomato varieties that I have grown that they’re less susceptible to pests and diseases, plus they seem to come on faster so you have a quicker harvest. 

There are currently around 140-plus varieties of dwarf tomatoes. The Dwarf Tomato Project is something that my good friend Craig LeHoullier has worked on with colleagues around the world. They have been continuing to breed and stabilize seeds from their breeding project so that the seeds of dwarf tomato plants come true season after season. That means you could buy seeds of a dwarf tomato variety, grow out the plant, save the seeds, plant the seeds again the following year, and you would continue to get the same plant the following year.

Victory Seed Company has all the available varieties of dwarf tomato plants that you can get through seed. 

Dwarf tomato plants are just beautiful. They have foliage that generally is thicker, greener and lusher. The plants are stocky and very sturdy, though they will need some support as the fruit comes on — their weight can pull the plant over.

What I Want to Stop Doing in 2023
I tend to continue to buy more seeds despite knowing that I already have those same seed varieties in stock already. For example, I save my black krim tomato seeds every year from the fruit that I grow, but I still buy new black krim seeds.

I think I just love the process of ordering seeds, and it’s a habit I need to break.

When I go to sow seeds, I use the newest seeds first rather than the oldest seeds that I have on hand — so I don’t get around to using the oldest seeds, and when the next year comes, those old seeds are that much older. Some day down the road, those seeds won’t be viable anymore. 

 

Box of seed packets
Even though I have a vast seed collection, I can’t help myself from buying more seeds. I just love the process of browsing seed catalogs and picking out seeds. But I am trying to be better about using what I have before getting more.

 

New Things to Try in 2023
Like most of you, I can’t wait to get my tomato seeds started. I sow them indoors in February so they are ready to be planted out in April after the last risk of frost.

I love the process of growing my tomato seedling: putting the seeds in the soil mix, watching them germinate, potting them up, nurturing them along for six weeks and getting them in my garden and sharing them.

That’s the traditional time to do this. This is when everybody wants to get their tomatoes going because they want that Fourth of July ripe tomato just like I do. But for me here in Atlanta, zone 7b, where it’s hot and humid, I am fighting diseases sooner or later with all of my tomato plants or most of them.

By the time I get to the mid-summer timeframe, I’m tired of cutting out disease foliaged. And by the time August gets around, it’s easy to feel burned out

My good friend Brie Arthur, who is an expert tomato grower, has sworn off sowing tomatoes during the traditional time, Instead, she waits until June to sow her seeds and then gets them into the garden right around the Fourth of July or the middle of July. Growing in Raleigh, North Carolina, she still has enough time to grow them out and have an amazing crop of tomatoes before it gets too cold. 

I can share from my own experience last year that some of my tomatoes that I left in the ground rebounded in that latter part of the season to the point that they were the best they had ever looked in September coming into October and producing like crazy. 

I can’t resist the joy and pleasure of starting my tomato plants early, but I’d like to try. I have considered doing an early planting and then a second round later, around the time Brie puts tomato plants in the ground, but my concern there is that any diseases or pest issues that occur in the first round will easily move to the second-round plants. The best way to try this would be one planting.

Brie swears by this, and her word holds a lot of weight with me.

One thing that I already practice is propagating suckers. In spring, when tomato plants are putting out those suckers (shoots growing at 45-degree angles between the main branch and a side shoot) I remove those suckers and plant them in containers so they can set roots and become my backup plants. 

 

[NAME] [NAME] with a tomato in his fall garden.
I typically pull tomato plants by late summer, after they have experienced heat, pest and disease issues, but I left a few in the ground in 2022 and watched them rebound after those stresses passed. I harvest tomatoes later than I normally do, which was a real pleasure.

 

Succession Planting
I tend to go all out and plant all of one thing at one time. For example, let’s just say it’s bush beans — I’ll plant an entire bed of bush beans, though I should be planting a row of bush beans and then 10 days later, a second row, and 10 days after that, a third, and 10 days after that, a fourth, and so on. Staggering planting times leads to having a succession of harvested fresh beans throughout the growing season. 

Succession planting can help to reduce garden overwhelm — that feeling that there is just too much to be done. When the harvest comes in gradually, rather than all at once, the work is spread out and easier to handle. Another benefit of succession planting is that if you planted the first row too early and it gets killed by frost, the subsequent rows will likely do just fine. Likewise, if you planted a row too late, the earlier rows will still be successful.

Cabbage is another great example. How many cabbages do you need all at one time? I have a 4-foot-by-12-foot-wide bed that I fill with cabbage seedlings in spring and fall, and sure enough, the spring crop is ready for harvest all at the same time and the fall crop is no different. And on top of that, where do you store 24 cabbage heads? Not in your refrigerator. But that’s the dilemma I’m faced with almost every year, and I kind of laugh at myself because I know it’s coming every time. 

I do like seeing that full bed of cabbages heading up. It’s a beautiful site — but then you have to deal with it. And I don’t know many people who relish the opportunity to be given big heads of cabbage. Cabbage is just not the easiest thing to give away, especially when compared to fresh, heirloom, homegrown tomatoes.

So in 2023, I’ll be reminding myself to practice succession planting with more crops than ever.

 

Cabbages
Cabbages planted at the same time will form heads at the same time. But what are you going to do with 18 cabbage all at once? Staggering planting times, or succession planting, will also stagger the harvest.

 

More Flower Beds
Another thing I’m excited about this year is that we’ve added more raised beds for flower growing. It should be a beautiful sight.

The entire perimeter of my raised bed garden inside the split rail fence will have flowers all the way around: some cutting flowers, some native flowers, milkweed, lots of flowers that attract pollinating beneficial insect

I’m really glad I took the opportunity while I had it to have somebody bring the wood in and get that all set in place. The hard work is over and now it’s just filling with soil and adding the seeds. And with Tobi, my farm manager, who’s a great flower grower, I cannot wait to see how this garden looks this spring and summer. I look forward to sharing all of it with you, so be on the lookout. 

 

Future flower beds
These new beds in my garden will be planted with a range of flower species designed to attract beneficial insects while adding beauty to the garden.

 

Consider Sources of Shade
Many gardeners report that their first year was their most productive, and a very common reason for this is that what was once a very sunny spot is getting more and more shade. It could be that trees have expanded their canopies and now branches reach over the garden or the trees have just grown tall enough that they now block the sunlight’s path.

If you’ve gone from full sun to partial sun, there are a few options. You can live with it and accept your garden won’t be as productive as it once was, you can choose to plant more leafy crops that don’t require as much sun to thrive, or you can find creative ways to have that tree pruned by an arborist. And as a last resort, you can have the tree removed.

Try Disease-Resistant Varieties
Even though there are what appears to be unlimited varieties on pretty much every crop you can grow these days, I tend to go with the heirloom varieties that I have just always enjoyed growing in spite of the fact that many of them are challenging and they come with diseases and things that drive me crazy.

This past year, I was growing my bed of cucumbers. I’ve said before, cucumbers are not my favorite thing to grow for a couple reasons, and one is that they’re very prickly on the stems and the leaves, and reaching in to harvest a cucumber, contorting your body in crazy positions, is always itchy. And then there are the diseases — I always have cucumber diseases.

But this past year I grew some new hybrid cucumber varieties, including Sweet-Slice. The seed seller called this variety “bulletproof to diseases.” That caught my attention, and it looked like a nice size cucumber. I had nothing to lose and potentially everything to gain. I was expecting diseased leaves to occur over time, but in my local climate conditions — hot and humid — the bulletproof claim held up.

My advice is to order more new-to-you varieties with the traits that you are looking for.  I will be getting out of my comfort zone much more and trying some of these newer varieties, because if this is the result I can get more often with these newer hybrids, I’m all in. 

 

Harvest basket with cucumbers
I had great success growing Sweet-Slice cucumbers this year. The variety is marketed as “bulletproof” to diseases.

 

Improve Pest Management Strategy
What I do now for pest management works very well overall:  I practice patience,  invite in beneficial insects and create an environment where Mother Nature basically takes over and I’m not spraying or doing other things that could kill the beneficial insects as they kills the pests.

All of us should have a better understanding of the pests that are likely to impact the plants that were growing. We should understand where in the life cycle of that pest can we be most effective at minimizing the damage so that we can eliminate them more quickly. 

When we understand a pest’s lifecycle, we can identify biological control solutions to get ahead of the issue before it becomes a problem.

The squash vine borer is a good example of this. I loathe the vine borer because it can decimate plants seemingly overnight. But if we know that the vine borer is the larva of a black and red moth, we can look out for the moth to get a clue of when it is laying eggs. We can put out insect barrier to keep the moths off our plants so they can’t lay their eggs, we can remove eggs by hand or treat the plants with Bt before the vine borers can cause destruction.

Monitoring for the presence of squash vine borer moths is easy with a pheromone-based indicator trap. The male moths are attracted to the pheromone, and if you find the males in the trap you will know that egg-laying females are present or soon to follow.

You can be proactive by adding beneficial nematodes (NemaSeek Hb by Arbico Organics) to the soil where squash vine borer are overwintering. The nematodes will eat the pupae and grow in population as they do.

 

Squash vine borer trap
Squash vine borer moth traps are great at detecting the presence of these moths in your garden, but the traps are not a control method. The traps only attract males, not the females that lay eggs on plants.

 

Grow More Natives
Many of us are interested in growing more native perennials and rewilding our yards. Reducing the size of our lawns and creating something closer to a meadow is more pollinator-friendly and attractive, and it supports birds that rely on insect larvae to rear their young in spring and seed heads to get through the winter.

Dr. Doug Tallamy and other advocates for native plants have spread the word that native plants are necessary for ecosystems to support native fauna.

We have the Georgia Native Plant Society here, which every month has native plant rescues: They learn about developments where urban sprawl and subdivisions will clear the native trees and plant material from an area, and they get in there first. With permission from the landowner, the plant rescue team ethically extracts native plants so they can be planted where they will be protected. It’s an easy way to get an instant native garden in your garden while doing a really good thing. Plus it’s free and fun.

Native plant society membership fees are typically close to nothing, and membership often comes with discounts on native plants.

Next week, I will be focusing on some of the basics of seed starting, one of my favorite topics. And I’ll be discussing experimenting with various seed mixes using peat-free options such as coir and PittMoss.

I am also experimenting with new soil-blocking products that I am excited to work with, and I’m soaking seeds in advance of sowing to see if it will increase germination rates or cut down on germination time. And there are some really cool new options for seed trays that I’m trying out.

This year, I am new to greenhouse growing, so I’m figuring out how to incorporate it into my seed-starting process while also thinking about insulating the greenhouse and using supplemental lighting to see what difference it makes. I look forward to having that discussion with you next week.

It can be difficult to find the time and energy to garden as much as we’d like to — and some gardening challenges stop us from ever getting started. This week, I’m sharing my tips for overcoming frequently encountered gardening challenges.


To identify the most common gardening challenges, Amy Prentice, my Director of Marketing and Communications, put out questions to my followers on Instagram and the members of the Online Gardening Academy™ community. Amy compiled their answers, and she joins me on the podcast this week to facilitate as I analyze the responses and provide teachable moments.

Amy Prentice, my Director of Marketing and Communications, joins me on the podcast this week to share the answers listeners gave to questions about gardening challenges and successes.

It’s important to remember that gardening is a journey, not a destination. It can feel more intimidating than fun at times, so you need to keep in mind that you can’t expect to learn everything there is to know in your first year. In fact, what I love about gardening is that there is always more to learn and room to improve. 

It’s undeniable that gardening will come with challenges, but each challenge is an opportunity to educate yourself and become a better, smarter, more confident gardener.

If you would like to read the entire rundown of my solutions to common gardening challenges, you can check out the show notes from the original release of this episode. 

While you’re here, I want to pause a moment to remind you that I have a new book out, “The Vegetable Gardening Book: Your complete guide to growing an edible organic garden from seed to harvest.” It’s chock full of insider tips and new-to-you information that will help you step up your gardening game and tackle challenges. 

At the end of this month, I’m offering free, live, online training sessions at my Organic Vegetable Gardening Summit. The summit runs from March 28–31 from noon to 1 p.m. Eastern each day and will cover topics such as organic gardening fundamentals, the importance of planning ahead, and setting up your garden to conquer the many challenges that Mother Nature throws our way. Get the details and register.

And on tap for this spring is my new Online Gardening Academy™ premium course, Organic Vegetable Gardening. Sign up for the waitlist here.

Common Gardening Hurdles
Being a renter is one of the reasons most frequently given for why someone doesn’t start the garden they desire. Gardening options can be restricted when you live on a property that you don’t own yourself, but that doesn’t mean that gardening is out of the question.

You may not be able to convert the lawn into a planting bed, but you can still raise indoor plants with a grow light or near a sunny window. I know that’s not exactly what people have in mind when they talk about starting a garden, but the reality is that you have to make the most of your living situation.

Even if you can’t have a garden while you’re a renter, you can still improve your skills by studying, watching videos, attending courses and joining gardening communities to get to know gardeners and see what they’re doing. When you eventually get a piece of land of your own, you’ll have the knowledge to hit the ground running.

If you have access to a balcony, deck or patio, you can get some grow bags or containers and some potting soil, and get started. You’ll be surprised by how much you can accomplish with limited space.

 

Grow bag filled with Soil3
Tenants can raise plants in grow bags without upsetting their landlords.

 

Some gardeners reported that they didn’t know what to plant and when they should plant it. Getting over this hurdle is a matter of getting to know the seasons, and that comes with practice, education and making mistakes. Take these learning opportunities to grow as a gardener.

If you are having a hard time understanding the correct timing, the first thing you need to look up is your local last frost date — the date in spring after which there is no more risk of frost until fall. That date will give you a good idea of what plants will survive outdoors. 

Knowing the first frost date of fall will tell you if a plant will have enough time to mature before frosts start. You can look up the frost dates for your ZIP code at almanac.com.

The cost of starting a garden and not having the materials you think you need are more examples of common gardening hurdles. If that’s the situation you’re in, I want you to know that you can make do with less than you think, and many materials are available for free if you know where to look.

If you reach out to online groups on apps and social media in search of seeds, pots and other materials, you’ll likely find that at least one of your neighbors has an abundance of supplies and is happy to share.

I also like to reuse materials that otherwise would have ended up in the recycling bin or the trash. For example, I have upcycled pizza boxes for seed trays and birthday cake containers for humidity domes. 

You may also have access to free municipal compost from your town that you can use rather than purchasing soil. 

 

Packets of saved seeds
If you are in need of seeds but the expense is a concern, reach out on local neighborhood groups online. You’ll likely find a neighbor with more seeds than they could ever hope to use, and they’ll be happy to share.

 

A lack of sufficient space is another hurdle I often hear of, but as many gardeners have proven, no matter how little land you have to grow on, it’s enough to have a garden. Even the strip of grass between the sidewalk and the street presents an opportunity.

There are an increasing number of plants on the market that were bred specifically for small spaces. They are just like the crops we know and love, but they will stop growing once they have reached a certain size. Look up “patio plants” and “dwarf plants,” and you’ll find options that fit your space. 

Not having enough direct sunlight is a common challenge for gardeners who live among tall buildings or many trees, but this hurdle too can be overcome. Though most vegetables require between six and eight hours daily of direct sunlight to produce fruit, if your space receives fewer hours of sun, you can still grow leafy greens such as lettuce, spinach and arugula. Plus, there are shade-tolerant and shade-loving ornamentals, such as hostas, ferns, azaleas, and rhododendrons.

 

Lettuce growing in rows
If you don’t have a location that gets full sun, you can still grow shade-tolerant plants such as lettuce.

 

Gardening Pain Points  
Pests, diseases and weather are the top three pain points that discourage gardeners. But if you pick a plant that is suited to your area and grow it in the ideal conditions, it will thrive. When you put the right plant in the right place, it will withstand considerable pest damage and be less susceptible to diseases as well.

Being proactive will allow you to get ahead of pest and disease issues before they get beyond your control. Go out into your garden once or twice a day to observe the changes happening day to day, hour to hour. You can detect pest activity and do something about it before it becomes a full-blown infestation.  Take, for example, the squash vine borer. If you know when the squash vine borer moth arrives in your garden, you can install row cover to stop it from laying its eggs on your squash plants. 

To mitigate disease problems, practice good garden sanitation by removing diseased plant material and disposing of it away from your garden and compost pile. Build healthy soil that has good microbial activity to fend off pathogens, and apply mulch to serve as a barrier between soil-borne pathogens and foliage. Refrain from overhead watering so pathogens won’t splash around. And clean youR tools between cuts with alcohol or a bleach solution. 

Periods of drought, too much rain or intense summer heat can create aggravation, but you can get through it. You just have to be prepared. Work on the things that you can control, like adding organic material to your soil so it drains well in heavy rain and will retain enough water to keep your plants happy.  

You can also learn season-extension techniques, like using a frost blanket to protect your plants during a cold snap.

 

pest caterpillar on the underside of a leaf
Pests are one of the top gardening pain points but they’re not a reason to throw in the towel. Take proactive steps to prevent pests from laying eggs, and monitor your garden regularly to nip problems in the bud.

 

Overcoming a Lack of Experience
People who are interested in gardening but aren’t sure of where to begin sometimes let that hold them back indefinitely, and that’s too bad. The fact is no one really understands gardening until they have gone out and done it themselves, so the key to getting started — is getting started. You’re only really going to learn when you have your hands in the soil and you’re out there making the mistakes that teach the lessons that stick.

When you do get started, don’t compare yourself to others, especially the picture-perfect gardens on Instagram. Social media never shows the whole picture. The gardens you may feel jealous of have problems that you’re not seeing. The pursuit of perfection is a waste of time, especially in gardening. Pursue progress, not perfection.

Where Success Begins
Many gardeners shared that behind their success stories are education and online learning. My Online Gardening Academy courses on Growing Epic Tomatoes, Master Seed Starting, Beginning Gardener Fundamentals and other subjects have helped struggling gardeners make breakthroughs. Beginning Gardener Fundamentals covers everything from soil building to planting and harvesting. It’s designed for new gardeners and anyone who wants to improve their skills.

And I’m excited to debut my new premium course, Organic Vegetable Gardening, this spring. Sign up for the waitlist here.

Make sure you get your gardening information and advice from a reliable place. When you’re new, it’s hard to separate bad gardening advice from good, so turn to proven sources of gardening information, such as your local cooperative extension, rather than social media. 


[NAME] [NAME] with armfuls of veggies
Perfect photographs with great lighting and no pests or diseases don’t tell the whole story of a garden. All gardens encounter challenges, whether the challenges are posted on social media or not.

Gardeners know compost is the best thing for their soil, but the science behind the benefits of compost is generally not well understood. To shed light on how composting works and why compost enriches soil, my guest this week is chemist, author, and Master Gardener Robert Pavlis.


Robert is an expert on busting gardening myths using science. His background and training are in chemistry and biochemistry, and he’s also made laboratory software. He now applies his professional history to his gardening hobby and has written several books that demonstrate how the two intersect. His latest is “Compost Science for Gardeners: Simple Methods for Nutrient-Rich Soil,” an easy-reading, practical guide to the science behind a healthy soil ecosystem and thriving plants. This book is right down my strike zone, and if you’re a compost fanatic like me, you’ll feel the same way.
 

Robert is one of the most frequent guests on the podcast, and for good reason. He’s been here to discuss houseplant myths, garden products you don’t need, and plant science. Robert is no-nonsense and he doesn’t mince words, which I love. In his appearances, on his website, GardenMyths.com, and in his series of books on garden science, Robert gives straightforward answers to challenging gardening questions. He believes that when gardeners learn a little more about science, they’ll understand what they’re doing and will be able to better interpret what they see and hear. 

Robert has a 6-acre botanical garden known as Aspen Grove Gardens in southern Ontario, Canada, packed with more than 3,000 species of plants, trees and shrubs. It’s located in zone 5 and is mostly dedicated to ornamentals with a focus on really interesting plants, though he also has a small vegetable garden.

Robert will also be part of a series of conversations that will be included in my new Online Gardening Academy™ premium course, Organic Vegetable Gardening. I’ll be speaking with top experts in their fields about specific content. Sign up for the waitlist here.

At the end of this month, I’m offering free, live, online training sessions at my Organic Vegetable Gardening Summit. The summit runs from March 28–31 from noon to 1 p.m. Eastern each day and will cover topics such as organic gardening fundamentals, the importance of planning ahead, and setting up your garden to conquer the many challenges that Mother Nature throws our way. Get the details and register.

And while you’re here, I also want to remind you that I have a new book out, “The Vegetable Gardening Book: Your complete guide to growing an edible organic garden from seed to harvest.” It’s chock full of insider tips and new-to-you information that will help you step up your gardening game and tackle challenges. 

Defining Compost
Composted organic material sure looks like soil, but finished compost and soil are, in fact, quite different. Soil is 50% a mix of sand, silt and clay with a little organic matter mixed in, and the other half is air and water, while compost doesn’t contain any sand, silt or clay.

“Although good soil and compost kind of look the same — they’re both black, they’re fluffy, they’re soft — they’re very, very different on a chemical basis,” Robert says. “The one is essentially ground-up rock, and the other one is all organic matter.”

Robert says explaining compost is quite complicated and most gardeners have a misunderstanding of what it is. In fact, he doesn’t like the term “finished compost” because it is a misnomer, though he acknowledges it is a handy term.

“‘Finished compost’ to a gardener means that it’s composted enough that we can put it in our garden and it’s ready to do some good for the plants and it’s not going to harm anything,” he says. “That’s ‘finished compost,’ but it is nowhere near finished.”

Another definition is compost is that it starts with things we recognize, such as banana peels and grass clippings, gets mixed up and goes through the process of decomposition until it reaches a point where we don’t recognize it as the original inputs anymore. 

“We see this black stuff,” Robert says. “The problem is, our eyes aren’t very good at looking at this stuff. I mean we can’t see it on a molecular basis.”

Though we may consider the compost to be “finished” at this point, in actuality, the composting process is just starting, and most won’t happen until after it’s been added to our gardens.

In making compost, we start with large, recognizable things like a banana peel, Robert says. It has lots of plant cells and a lot of structure to it, but it’s absolutely useless to plants. Plants can’t use any of it until it’s been adequately degraded. 

“We have to break the cells apart,” he explains. “We have to break the structure apart, and fungi is the most important part of that process. Then we break it down into small cells, and then the cells have to be broken apart, and inside the cells is all kinds of large molecules. And again, even at that stage it’s pretty much useless for plants.”

It’s not until other microbes move in, particularly bacteria, that the large molecules are broken up into smaller and smaller and smaller pieces until they release a nitrate molecule. “Only then can plants use it,” Robert says.

“In general, that compost will continue composting for about five years after we put it in the soil, and I think that’s the part that a lot of gardeners don’t really appreciate,” he says. “So they take this compost, they put it in the soil and say, ‘Ah, now I’ve added some food for my plants. It’s helping my plants.’ But it’s really not. It’s a slow process. 

“It’s going to help them over a five-year period, and there is some nutrients released right away, and some tomorrow and some the day after, and some next year and some the year after.”

That slow degradation process taking place in the garden is what makes compost so valuable. It’s slow-feeding plants, which is much better for them than a fast feed, Robert says. 

“Another critical piece is that nitrogen runs away very quickly in soil with rain,” he adds. “So we have a heavy rain, and that washes all the nitrogen away from the soil and past the root zone. And so plants are now starving, but the compost the next day will start decomposing a bit more and release some nitrogen. And so that’s what’s feeding our plants. They want that long-term slow, steady feed.”

 

A scoop of compost
Compost and soil may look alike, but compost is quite different from soil Good soil is only 5% organic matter, while this compost is 100% organic matter.

 

More Benefits of Compost
In addition to feeding plants, compost does so much to improve soil. The organic matter helps to build up soil aggregates out of sand, silt and clay, which improves soil structure so it holds air and drains properly.

“We talk a lot about the nutrients, but for soil building, the carbon is much more important,” Robert says. “And that’s what compost is adding. It’s adding all that carbon and oxygen, and that’s what’s being used by the microbes in the soil to develop better soil structure.”

Compost also has a high cation-exchange capacity, which means it holds nutrients well, like little magnets, he says. 

Clay also has a high cation-exchange capacity, but sand and silt don’t. “In sand and silt, those nutrients just run through the soil,” Robert says. “When we put compost in there, the compost now holds onto those nutrients and basically holds them close to the roots until the roots can actually use them.”

 

[NAME] [NAME] screening compost
A frame with hardware cloth is useful for screening compost, so any large materials that haven’t broken down yet can go back in the compost pile instead of being added to your garden.

 

Why We Should All Be Composting
Organic material is one of the best things you can ever add to your garden, if not the top thing. So if you aren’t composting, you’re really missing out. There are also numerous environmental concerns.

“The biggest problem with not composting is that you send the material off your site,” Robert says. “It leaves the soil that you have, and that causes a bunch of problems. First of all, we then have to truck it around the city to somewhere else, which is bad for the environment.”

If the city takes that organic material from you and makes compost at a municipal facility, it has to be trucked around to get back to gardeners and farmers.

“So we’re taking this valuable resource and trucking around the city using up gasoline, polluting the air producing CO2, when you could just leave it on your property,” Robert says.

Another problem for gardeners is that removing organic material from your property repeatedly will reduce the amount of organic matter in your soil, degrading the soil quality.

“What you’ve essentially done is taken organic matter out of the soil, turn it into plant growth, then we cut that, and then we put it in a bag and send it to the city,” Robert says.

It makes no sense to do that, he says. You don’t even need to have a compost pile and engage in hot composting to keep organic material on site. For the most part, Robert just cuts and lets the cuttings drop when he trims or deadheads plants. His grass clippings stay on the lawn. He lets most of the leaves stay where they fall, excluding leaves that fall on the lawn and risk smothering it. Even in that case, he just rakes it into garden beds rather than move it into a compost pile.

“Nature compost automatically,” he says. “We don’t even have to do anything.”

Hot composting may be faster, but it’s not necessary for turning organic materials into usable compost.

 

compost bins
My compost system made out of pallet wood, with one bin for adding new inputs, one with “finished” compost that I can draw from and one bin that is on its way to becoming useable compost.

 

The Nutrients in Compost
Compost has an NPK ratio of 1:1:1 or 0.5:0.5:0.5. That’s a measure of how much nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium is in a fertilizer, by volume. 

“It’s a low amount, but it’s released steadily to the soil,” Robert says.

He also reminds us that because we’ll add compost every year, by year three, four or five, there will be a lot of nutrients in the soil, at a fairly high level.  He recommends an inch or two a year, so it will never build up nutrient levels so high that they will cause problems.

Most of us don’t get our soil tested, so we don’t know what deficiencies our soil has. But that doesn’t stop gardeners from applying fertilizer anyway.

“If we don’t know, then I think it’s wrong to just throw a bunch of fertilizer around hoping it’s going to work,” Robert says.

What NPK Ratio to Shoot For
At some point along the way, a balanced fertilizer, such as a 10:10:10, became a standard recommendation for gardens. But that’s not really what plants need.

“I don’t know where the 10, 10 10 came from. I’m pretty sure this goes back a long ways, when we first started making fertilizer and we really didn’t know what plants needed,” Robert says. “So some marketing person thought, well, if we give them some of each, people will be happy.”

He says this makes no sense because no plant is missing all three nutrients in equal proportions, and plants don’t use all three nutrients in the same way.

“I spent some time actually looking at what plants use, and every plant I’ve looked at uses a ratio of 3:1:2, maybe 3:1:2.5,” Robert says.

This means plants need three times as much nitrogen as phosphate, and potassium needs are somewhere in the middle of the other two.

“Our job as gardeners is to replace the nutrients that are missing in soil, not to feed the plants, and I think that’s a key point that gets missed in so many discussions,” Robert says. “… So we should be better understanding what’s missing in our soil.”

Because compost is a balanced fertilizer, it adds more phosphate than plants need. While the nitrogen is used up or runs away quickly and the potassium runs away fairly quickly, the phosphate stays put.

“Next year I come along and I add another layer, 1:1:1, same thing happens,” Robert says. “So over time, I’m slowly building up the phosphate, and that is a real problem in gardens.”

It’s a worse problem when using manure that contains even more phosphate than compost, he adds.

Phosphate in synthetic fertilizers is in a form that is readily available to plants right away, but when there is too much readily available phosphate present, natural processes will convert it into a form that is unavailable — like rock phosphate. 

 

Handful of compost
The NPK ratio of compost is about 1:1:1, and the nutrients are released slowly over years. An inch or two layer of compost annually will serve plants well.

 

Other Benefits of Compost
Because of its high cation-exchange capacity, compost buffers pH. It absorbs ions, helping to raise the pH of acidic soil and to lower the pH of alkaline soil, bringing them closer to neutral. 

Compost can also potentially remove toxins and disable pesticides. Robert attributes this to the fact that compost is great for encouraging microbial activity. Those microbes will degrade the organic compounds that make up herbicides.

“The active ingredient in Roundup is glyphosate,” Robert points out. “There are actually bacteria that eat glyphosate. So if we get our bacterial level higher and we put on some Roundup, it will disappear faster because of the microbes.”

Heavy metals are a different story.

“When we’re looking at heavy metals, they never disappear,” Robert says. “So something like a lead molecule won’t disappear. It’s there forever. We can move it around from place to place, but we can’t get rid of it. And all our soil has heavy metals, by the way, which a lot of people don’t realize. Even good soil has heavy metals. It’s just that the levels are low enough that we’re not too concerned about it.”

Heavy metals will stick to compost the same way nutrients stick to compost via cation exchange. This essentially deactivates the heavy metals, making them unavailable to plants.

How to Apply Compost
Some gardeners, like English horticulturist Charles Dowding, use compost as the mulch layer on their garden beds. Then there are gardeners like me who put leaf mulch over the compost, to protect it.

For gardeners in a warm climate, it makes sense to protect the living things in compost from the baking sun. In cooler climates, this will be less of a concern.

Robert points out that in vegetable gardens, working compost into the soil is easy, while in a herbaceous garden, where gardeners don’t want to disturb the roots, just laying compost on the soil surface makes the most sense.

When you topdress with compost, worms and other soil organisms will come up, grab the compost, and take it down, so before long it’s in the soil anyway, he says.

Working compost into the soil of a new garden bed to get good soil fast also makes good sense, but Robert says for an established garden that already has good soil, it’s not really necessary, and topdressing is the way to go.

 

Topdressing the garden with 1 inch of compost annually can provide all the nutrients an intensively planted vegetable garden needs, according to Lee Reich's calculations.
You can mix compost into soil when establishing a new bed, but if you are working in a herbaceous garden or in a vegetable garden that is already very fertile, topdressing is the way to go.

 

Why Gardeners Shouldn’t Go Overboard with Compost
If a little compost is a good thing for the garden, why not use a lot more? I get asked this question a lot, and there are a number of reasons not to go overboard with compost.

As mentioned above, excessive compost will lead to a buildup of phosphate in the soil, and that’s bad for plant roots.

“If you use too much compost, you can end up with toxic soil,” Robert says.

He sees this most often in raised beds that gardeners fill with really good soil and lots of compost.

“You’ve made your soil too good,” Robert says. “We have this idea that compost is great, so more is better — and that’s simply not true. Plants grow much better when most of the stuff is soil, that sand, silt and clay. And good soil only has about 5% organic matter, and that organic matter includes not only the compost, but all of the other stuff that dies in there, the old dead plant roots and so on. So our goal is 5% organic matter. That’s it.”

Compost Myth Busting
There are a number of myths surrounding composting, so I thought I’d ask the garden myth-buster himself to separate facts from fiction.

Myth #1: Composting Is Too Difficult  
“Composting can be as easy or as hard as you want,” Robert says. “It can be a lot of work and a lot of fun. Or it can be really, really simple.”

When you decide to compost, you need to pick the method that’s most suitable to you, he advises. It will depend on the amount of material you have, the space you have and the amount of time you want to dedicate. 

“There is a method that is zero work if you want it,” he says.

The cut-and-drop method he explained above creates no extra work. In fact, it’s less work than bagging up cuttings or grass clippings for disposal.

Myth #2: Composting Attract Rodents
“We don’t see the rodents in our garden very often,” Robert says. “They’re really good at hiding, and they come out at night, and then suddenly you build this pile and you put a bunch of goodies in there and you see them and you go, ‘Oh no, we have mice, we have rats, we have raccoons, we have — well, you have those anyways.”

A compost pile may feed the mice or rats you already have, but it won’t attract rodents that weren’t there before, according to Robert.

It could also be that you are putting things into your compost that you shouldn’t be anyway: fats, greases, dairy, meat, bones, etc. from your kitchen. 

And if an open pile is a nuisance, you can choose a closed system, such as a compost tumbler.

Myth #3: Composting Smells
“If a compost pile smells, you’re doing it wrong, bottom line,” Robert says, “and the odors that you get can actually tell you what the problems are. If you do it correctly, there’s virtually no smell whatsoever.”

Compost can smell if there is an imbalance of green (nitrogen-rich) inputs and brown (carbon-rich) inputs. When is too much green material by volume, add browns such as leaves, newspaper and cardboard to fix the imbalance. The compost may also smell if the conditions are anaerobic, meaning there is a lack of oxygen.  Mix up the compost to aerate it and refrain from adding too much water, so oxygen-loving bacteria can move in.

And when you do hot composting right, it will neutralize weed seeds and pathogens. Robert adds that by fall all plants are covered in fungus, so he says not to worry too much about composting diseased plant material.

Myth #4: You Need to Buy Compost Activator
Compost activators come in two types. The first contains microbes, the idea being that your compost pile is missing microbes so you need to add them in, like adding yeast to dough to make bread, Robert says. However, he says compost inputs are covered in microbes already.

“Everything you put into that pile is covered in microbes,” he says. “So those products are not needed.”

The second type of activator is a source of nitrogen, which Roberts says can be useful when starting a compost pile in fall, when gardeners have lots of “browns,” like leaves, but not as many “green”  inputs.

“We have too much carbon and not enough nitrogen, and so the pile never gets going because of low nitrogen levels. Then adding extra nitrogen can help,” he says.

Compost starters are probably the most expensive nitrogen you can buy, while any nitrogen fertilizer will work, he says. Organic options include blood meal, but anything that has nitrogen in it will get a pile going. 

Myth #4: You Must Get the Ratios Right
The browns and greens don’t matter, Robert says. If you pile organic material up, it will make compost.

“The browns and greens are only important if you want to make fast compost,” he says.

Getting the ratios correct will speed up the process, but failing to get the ratios right is fine too. The composting process will be slower, but it will still happen,

In fact, Robert hates the terms “browns” and “greens.” He finds the terms to not be all that accurate. For example, manure and coffee grounds are brown, but actually “greens.” And grass clippings are green, but if they’re too old, they’re “browns.”

Coffee grounds have a ratio of about 30 carbon to 1 nitrogen, so they are almost perfect the way they are, Robert says, in terms of making hot compost. A hot compost pile should also be at that ratio. He explains all the calculations for doing this properly in “Compost Science for Gardeners.” 

Another thing to take into account is moisture levels in compost inputs. Robert came up with a new way for doing that using measurements in volume rather than weight and three piles: one high in carbon, one high in nitrogen and one that’s more balanced. He can add from the first two piles to the third pile to keep it in balance.

As an avid composter, I feel pretty proud of the compost that I make, and it doesn’t take that long. And I’m very aware of the ratio issues and the carbon and nitrogen and all that you should know on a geekier level. And yet when push comes to shove and I’m in the real world, I’m out there just taking all my organic matter from inside and outside and putting it in, mixing it up periodically and spraying it with a hose — and I have awesome compost in three months. And so for those that are just a little bit intimidated by carbon and nitrogen do not be. It’s going to happen anyway — it’s just a matter of how quickly it’s going to happen. 

 

[NAME] [NAME] turning compost
I am very aware of the ratios that are supposed to go into a hot compost pile, but when it comes down to it, I throw everything in, from inside my house and outside, and mix it up and wet it down periodically — and get great compost in the end.

 

Things to Compost, or Not Compost
“We can compost everything,” Robert says. “If something dies out in the woods, it composts. Nature takes care of it.”

Still, there are some things we may not want to compost, and on the other side of the coin, things people are concerned about but shouldn’t be.

Meat can attract rodents and is slow to compost, so Robert does not recommend composting it. Grease is also slow to compost and will slow down the process for the whole pile. 

“There’s not much point in putting bones in because they’re going to take a hundred years to decompose,” Robert says.

He does throw eggshells into his compost, but he says he knows they won’t decompose quickly either. He doesn’t put paper in his compost because it takes a long time to decompose. However, I shred paper in a $150 confetti shredder, and those tiny paper pieces will decompose within two weeks. Newspapers, magazines and corrugated cardboard are all fine to compost, according to Robert, but he says to avoid paperboard, like cereal boxes, which are printed with special ink. Pizza boxes can be greasy and in the past were commonly coated with chemicals to stop them from absorbing oils. The most notorious chemicals have been largely phased out, so you can compost pizza boxes if you wish and they are not too greasy.

Robert doesn’t mind composting pet waste. He figures that you live with your pets, so you’re already exposed to their waste anyway and including it in your compost won’t expose you any further to diseases.

Some people compost “humanure,” i.e., human manure. Robert says there are some potential disease issues, but they’re a pretty small concern. And human urine is good for compost, according to Robert, because it has high nitrogen levels.

 

Coffee Grounds in a compost bin
Coffee grounds are a great compost input, and even if you don’t drink coffee yourself, you may be able to get used grounds from a local cafe that will be happy to unload them.

 

How Long Does Compost Last?
If a pile of “finished” compost just sits there without being added to a garden, it will continue composting.

“The microbes are still active in there,” Robert says. “They’re still degrading things. Nutrients are being released. Now, most of those nutrients will wash away. So if we have this pile in the open and it rains, it’s going to wash the nutrients out and into the soil below the compost pile. So, we don’t lose them, but they may go in an area of the soil you don’t really care about.”

Because water is a charged molecule, rain will pull some nutrients off the compost and wash it away.

The best thing to do is to use compost up right away, Robert says. Alternatively, the compost can be dried up to stop the microbial activity. Because the bacteria and fungi live within a water layer on the compost, in the absence of moisture, the microbes die or hibernate. Either way, they stop breaking down the compost.

Some microbes will go into a state of suspended animation and become spores. “They can last quite a long time that way,” Robert says. Then when moisture is reintroduced, they will reactivate. And when the compost is added to soil, the microbes present in soil already will use the material.

“Think of compost more as a food for microbes rather than an important source of microbes,” he says. “If we take compost and let’s say we sterilize it — kill everything that’s living in there — it still has all the value there. And the minute I take that and put it on soil, the microbes that are in soil will start eating it and start multiplying.”

 

compost bins
When compost breaks down to a state where none of the inputs are recognizable anymore, it’s time to add it to your garden. But if you plan to store the compost, it should be dried out so the microbes die off or go into dormancy.

 

  What Happens to Compost in Winter
How active your compost pile is in winter will depend largely on your climate. Where Robert is in zone 5, his compost pile is frozen solid and doing basically nothing. 

“The microbes are not active. There’s no heat produced. It just sits there. So during the winter, we don’t compost, even if the pile is sitting there.”

Compost piles in cold climates will benefit from being sited in a sunny area. The more sun the pile gets, the sooner it will start the composting process again as winter gives way to spring.

Compost piles can also be wrapped in blankets or straw bales to hold heat for longer headed into fall. These wraps should be removed in spring to expose the pile to the sun again.

 

The Working Microbes in Compost
Different microbes have different preferred temperature ranges. Some are happy when a compost pile is new and still cool. Then as the microbial activity creates heat, microbes that enjoy the warmth will proliferate, and the microbes that like it cool will die off or go into hibernation mode. And some microbes will only be active at very high temperatures.

A pile of leaves exclusively tends not to get hot, so much of the degradation is done by fungi rather than bacteria, since fungi like it cool.

 

Pile of leaves
Leaf piles tend not to get hot because they decompose mainly via fungi, rather than bacteria. But the leaves will still decompose over time.

Last year, just before Christmas, a polar vortex brought sudden sub-zero temperatures to many states in the South, wreaking havoc on gardens and landscapes that were not designed for that kind of cold. To discuss the damage that has been apparent so far and what could reveal itself come spring, my guest this week is horticulturist Troy Marden. 


Troy has lived in Tennessee for 25 years and his career has included many kinds of horticulture work, including working at nurseries and botanical gardens and designing landscapes. In 2017, he launched a new venture, Troy B. Marden Travel, a tour company that takes small groups on visits to the great gardens of the world, and small, private gardens that rarely open to the public. He’s also the author of the “Southern Gardener’s Handbook.”

 

Troy Marden
Troy Marden’s career has included many kinds of horticulture work, including working at nurseries and botanical gardens and designing landscapes. In 2017, he Troy B. Marden Travel. 
 

The last time I saw Troy, we ran across each other in England at the Chelsea Flower Show last year. Troy points out that the gardening world is quite small, so it’s not unusual to run into people you know at international gardening events.

Troy’s Gardening Origins
Troy grew up in north central Kansas on the prairie, and he has gardened all his life. His grandparents gardened — and his parents vegetable gardened to varying degrees of success. 

He recalls that the first seed he ever planted was in his babysitter’s flower bed when he was 3 years old. His babysitter had a big silver maple tree. “The silver maples have those huge helicopters that fly down in the spring,” he says. “And to a 3-year-old kid, they were just the most fascinating thing I’d ever seen. And somehow I had this innate sense that if I poked them into the ground, they would grow — and they did. And her flower bed was full of them, and she said to my parents, ‘Come get these things.’”

All these years later, two of the trees are still standing in his parents’ yard.

Troy’s early interest in growing was stoked by participating in 4-H and FFA, the group formerly known as Future Farmers of America. Starting at 13 years old, he worked at a local nursery and continued working there until he moved to Tennessee when he was 22 years old.  “I had a little leg up on a lot of people because my career started 10 years before anybody else’s normally does,” he says. 

Troy also interned at Callaway Gardens in Georgia and Longwood Gardens in Pennsylvania and met great mentors. 

Troy’s Travel Company
Because Troy works in the travel industry, 2022 was spent making up for two years’ worth of lost opportunities due to COVID. Many of the people who had signed up in 2020 and 2021 and had their trips postponed were finally able to go. Now in 2023, he’s starting fresh. 

“People are ready to travel, but I think there’s a little hesitancy out there from time to time,” he says. “I don’t think we’re fully back yet, but we’re on our way.”

He takes small groups, just 15 or 16 people most of the time, to visit private and public gardens around the world.

He notes that gardeners like to share, and that’s how he’s been able to leverage social media to access private gardens that would not accept busloads of visitors. With just 15 visitors rather than 55, it can be an intimate experience, and the private gardeners don’t have to worry about their garden being trampled, he says.

The Polar Vortex
Troy and I were among the Southeast gardeners affected by the polar vortex around the turn of the year, him in the Nashville, Tennessee, area and me in the Atlanta, Georgia, region.

“Tennessee really was right in the crosshairs of this, and I know Atlanta got hit,” Troy says.

He lives up high on a ridge, about 40 minutes outside of Nashville, which sits in a “bowl” where the weather can be quite different.

“What I had at my house was a more than 50° temperature drop, from about 50° on that Thursday morning before Christmas, or that Thursday lunchtime before Christmas, to 4° below zero in eight hours,” Troy says. 

Plant cells are full of water, and water does two things when it freezes, he says: It crystallizes and expands.

“Those sharp pointy crystals puncture the cell walls, and when they thaw out, all of that water leaks out of the cells, and that damage is literally what we’re seeing on plants like Aucuba that have just turned completely black and plants like skip laurel that have just turned completely brown,” Troy says.

The punctured cells died in an instant once they thawed, he said. It was evident in some plants, like Aucubas, the next day — though Troy thinks if he cuts his 15-year-old Aucubas back to the ground they will grow back up from the roots. 

“The nice thing about some plants like that, when they’re well established, they’ll push back up very quickly,” he says.

Aucuba may be hardy to zone 7, but it is a subtropical plant with a big, very fleshy leaf, Troy says.

Then there are plants like boxwood, with small, hard leaves that have waxy surfaces. Troy’s were just fine for three weeks, but then orangey-brown lesions began to form, and within two or three days, the leaves began to turn brown and shed.

Some clients have boxwoods that appear to be just fine with no signs of damage, but boxwoods that were already stressed due to drought, leafminer, or some other affliction have not fared as well.

 

Boxweed Freezedried
Many boxwoods were simply freeze-dried by the rapid 54° drop, from 50° to -4° Fahrenheit, in under eight hours. Plants that were under drought stress were the most affected.

 

As for skip laurels (Prunus laurocerasus “Schipkaensis”), they began to present damage within a week, 

“I have some that are 15 years old and 15 to 18 feet tall at some clients’, and we’ve scratched the bark all the way to the bottom of the plant and cannot find anything alive,” Troy says.

Skip laurels, also called schip laurels, are one of the main screening plants used in Nashville, and Troy hasn’t seen one yet that he thinks is alive.

Otto Luyken laurels lost their leaves, but their stems are still green, so he has hope they will leaf out in spring. This is despite them being the same species (Prunus laurocerasus) as skip laurels. 

“Some of the damage was very immediate and very visible, and I think we’re still seeing damage appear today,” Troy says of the polar vortex, adding that he predicts more damage will become apparent through the spring. “There are some things that are still maybe hidden to us.”

 

Schip Laurel
Skip laurels were especially hard hit in the December flash freeze. Love them or hate them, they are one of the most widely used and commercially important plants for evergreen screens across the South, and the losses, both in home landscapes and in nurseries, are significant.
 

He points out that it was easy to notice damage on evergreen plants because they had foliage on when the damage occurred. For deciduous plants, Troy was worried about seeing bark split in Japanese maples, crepe myrtles, dogwoods and other thin-barked trees, but says he’s been lucky so far. However, if there is residual damage to those trees from the polar vortex, it will become visible when the plants put their energy into leafing out in spring. 

“For some plants that are already struggling, unfortunately, we may see more plant death when things try to leaf out because they’ll push out that big burst of energy to try to put on leaves and that’ll be all they have left,” he says. “So I don’t think we’re done. And I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but I also feel like all of us in the industry need to be honest with ourselves about where we are in all of this, and we need to be really honest with our clients and with the public.”

Troy knows one nurseryman who expects he lost between 6,000 and 8,000 hollies, among other damage.

Hollies are tough plants, but the damage they tolerate varies from variety to variety. Holly hybrids like Robin, Liberty, Oakland and Mary Nell got hit really hard, while a Nellie R. Stevens holly growing right next to them was fine.

Troy has heard stories from the 1980s, before he moved to Nashville, that a big freeze froze crepe myrtles and 40-year-old Nellie R. Stevens hollies completely to the ground. “They came back up from the base eventually if you were patient enough,” he says.

Then in the 1990s, a freeze defoliated all the hollies, and some did not leaf out again until June. “But they did finally leaf out,” Troy says.

These examples emphasize for Troy why gardeners should do the scratch test: Scratch the bark with a thumbnail or knife and see if it’s green underneath. If it is, the plant is still alive.

If you see bark split in a plant, especially thin-barked plants like Japanese maples and dogwoods or in a plant that is pushing its zone like Azalea, that means the cambium layer has frozen and died. That is the layer that moves the water and nutrients up and down the plant. 

 

Boxwood Dee Runk
“Dee Runk” boxwoods were hit especially hard in the Christmas freeze event. While some stems still appear green beneath the bark, only time will tell about their recovery.

 

Wind, and How It Damages Plants
“When a broadleaf evergreen plant goes dormant for the winter, its root system also goes partially dormant, and so it can’t take up water as effectively as it does during the growing season,” Troy points out.

Take for example the southern Magnolia, with its broad leaf surface.

“We had 50 to 55 mile an hour winds here in Tennessee, and so when your root system is frozen and you can’t draw up any water, or you’re semi-dormant and you’re not drawing up as much water but the wind is blowing 50 miles an hour and you’re getting evaporation out of that leaf surface. That’s another thing that we’re seeing is this foliage just freeze-drying. Because you’re in a wind tunnel.”

“By the time we had dropped below zero here, the wind had died down, but that afternoon, while we were in the teens and the single digits, as the temperature was dropping, we had 50-to-55-mile-an-hour winds.  So the wind chill at that point was well below zero and so not only are we getting actual physical damage to the plant from the freezing of the cells, we are getting wind damage. We’re getting windburn. And the plants are freeze-drying.

Troy also notes that he had no measurable rainfall from July 1 to the middle of October, so his garden went into winter in a drought-stressed state.

“The drought has played a factor. Plants were already under stress here, then this happened.”

He also thinks if the temperature dropped over the course of 48 hours or 72 hours rather than within eight hours to -4°, the plants would have been more resilient. A plant can quickly prepare itself for an event like the polar vortex if it has a warning, he says. “It will voluntarily decrease the concentration of water in its cells, which bumps up the amount of sugar, and sugar water doesn’t freeze or it doesn’t freeze as quickly.”

 

Cephalotaxus Fastigiata
The fastigiate, or upright, forms of several plants, including Cephalotaxus, fared worse in the pre-Christmas freeze than some of their lower-growing counterparts that had the benefit of some residual ground warmth.

 

Native Plants and the Polar Vortex
When Troy visited a nursery post-vortex with both American hollies and non-native red hollies, the American hollies looked much better. But where he lives, where the wind was whipping 55 miles per hour, natives like Illicium floridanum (aka Florida Anise bush) are just as brown as the nonnatives in his yard. On the other hand, the Illicium has green stems and will likely leaf out in spring again.

“The jury is still out on native plants,” Troy says. “Did they survive better? Perhaps some of them did, but I don’t think we’ve seen the full extent of the damage yet, just like we haven’t with some of our non-native ornamental plants.”

None of the wild eastern red cedars alongside the road near Troy are brown at all, but some of the cultivars used in landscapes are showing damage, he notes. 

A Big Loss
Troy had begun digging up his plants in anticipation of a move within the next year. He has between 600 and 700 plants in pots right now, but after the polar vortex, he thinks he’s lost about a third of them to freeze.

“A lot of the woody stuff probably will be okay. A lot of the things that grow from a bulb or a rhizome probably will be okay — the peonies are gonna be fine,” he says. But he anticipated he lost about half of his daylilies, which have a soft crown. 

“The good news is, in my breeding program, the stuff that lived, it’s going to be really, really hardy,” he says.

What to Expect
Leather-leaf-type Vibernums defoliated after the polar vortex even though they are rather evergreen in Nashville. Troy thinks there will be some deadwood to remove but the plants will survive. “But I’m not going to cut anything until I’m sure that it’s dead,” he adds.

Cryptomeria took a huge hit. Big old trees — 25 or 30 years old — did not have a green leaf left on them. “Typically you would say a conifer, if it defoliates, is not going to leaf back out from, quote-unquote, dead wood or bare wood,” Troy says. In this case, he’s unsure what’s going to be revealed come spring.

Leyland cypress (Cupressus × leylandii) and hinoki cypress (Chamaecyparis obtusa) both took heavy damage. But Sawara cypress (Chamaecyparis pisifera), including the popular cultivar “Golden Mop,” took no damage.

 “What I always say is that a plant that I’ve lost is a gardening opportunity. You know, it hurts sometimes, especially if you lose something that’s special to you or that you’ve paid a lot of money for. And this is gonna be costly, unfortunately for a lot of people, it’s going to be costly for homeowners. It’s gonna be costly for professionals.” 

He notes that some plants may not be as readily available this spring.

 Hydrangeas
Troy anticipates many of the macrophylla-type Hydrangeas will grow back from the base, perhaps after some really hard cutting. And they may not have very many blooms because they bloom on old wood. 

“Endless Summer and some of those new varieties that flower more readily on their newer growth, you may get some blooms late in the season. I think the paniculata Hydrangeas, like limelight and all of those popular ones, they bloom on their new wood. So even if you have to cut them to the ground, you’re going to get flowers this year,” Troy says. 

“As we’ve been going around and doing the bark test, paniculata Hydrangeas seem, at least up here, to have weathered this pretty well. They are pretty green underneath the bark.”

Camellia
Nashville is right on the edge of Camellia territory, so only the very hardiest Camellias can grow there.

“They have defoliated entirely up here, but most of them that I’ve seen are scratching a little bit green under the bark, so we’re going leave them and we’ll see what happens,” Troy says.

 

Baths Pink Dianthus after the polar vortex
“Bath’s Pink” Dianthus after the polar vortex.

 

Preparing for the Next Polar Vortex
“We’re dealing with Mother Nature, and Mother Nature is always in control no matter what — always going to win. And as gardeners, we just kind of learned to accept that,” Troy says.

Anti-desiccant doesn’t necessarily help with anything at a cellular level, but it will protect the surface of the leaf and maybe give you a couple of degrees of freeze protection,” he says. 

In Florida when a deep freeze is coming, citrus growers will turn on their sprinklers to protect their crops. 

A lot of people think that that is because ice is an insulator, and that actually is not quite true,” Troy says. “Ice doesn’t insulate.”

What does happen is that when a water molecule freezes, it gives off heat. 

“So that’s why in the citrus fields in Florida, they run the water the entire time that they are below freezing. … That act of water turning to ice gives off just enough heat to keep things from freezing,” he explains.

“As industry professionals and as homeowners and as gardeners and people who love our outdoor spaces, I don’t think we can give up on plants that we’ve lost,” Troy says.

He says this is, he hopes, a one-off weather event that should not dictate what he does going forward. For example, red hollies have been good to Nashville garden designers for almost three decades, and he doesn’t plan to give them up.

He notes that many native plants are very site-specific, so he urges caution before making misleading blanket statements about replacing cultivars with natives. A plant that might be native in one part of your state will not necessarily do well where you intend to grow it. 

If you want to grow epic potatoes, there is no one better to learn from than Jim Gerritsen, the founder of Wood Prairie Family Farm in Bridgewater, Maine. Jim has more than 45 years of experience growing potatoes organically, and he came on the podcast to share everything you need to know to have a successful harvest, from how to prepare the seed potatoes and soil to how to store tubers so they’ll last for months on end.

Jim is a third-generation farmer who started Wood Prairie Family Farm in Northern Maine when he was 21 years old, and in recent years, he passed the baton to his son, Caleb. The farm is 115 acres and has been certified USDA organic since 2002. It also has the Maine Seed Potato Certification Program’s seal of approval, meaning it can sell seed potatoes — the little tubers that farmers and gardeners alike plant to grow a new crop of potatoes — that are state certified to be free of disease and damage. 

Maine was the No. 1 potato-producing state in the country about 70 years ago, and Aroostook County, where Wood Prairie Family Farm is located, was the center of the “potato empire,” Jim says. Potatoes have been grown in the area since the first European settlers arrived, and today Maine continues to be the national leader in growing seed potatoes.

This week’s encore presentation of my conversation with Jim from 2021 is very timely, as potato planting time is nearing. For a detailed write-up of everything we discussed, with photos, see the show notes from the original broadcast.

While you’re here, I want to take a moment to remind you that I have a new book out, “The Vegetable Gardening Book: Your complete guide to growing an edible organic garden from seed to harvest.” It’s chock full of insider tips and new-to-you information that will help you step up your gardening game and tackle challenges. 

And on tap for this spring is my new Online Gardening Academy™ premium course, Organic Vegetable Gardening. Sign up for the waitlist here.

Why Choose Organic Seed Potatoes
Conventionally grown seed potatoes have been treated with fungicide and systemic insecticide and given synthetic fertilizer. But an organic seed potato hasn’t been treated with chemicals, and that means it’s a case of “survival of the fittest” Jim says. Therefore, organic seed potatoes are resilient, with more vigor and better disease resistance. In good soil, organic seed potatoes will grow into healthy plants that don’t need chemical pesticides and fertilizers, and the tubers will be more nutrient dense. 

Why Maine Is a Great Place to Grow Epic Potatoes
Two things that make Maine a great place for growing potatoes, Jim says: the climate and the soil. 

Maine benefits from being far north, where it doesn’t get all that hot in the summertime, he says. It also has a good distribution of rainfall, cool nights and sunny, warm days. And the soil is sandy and well-drained.

Potatoes are a cool-season crop with shorter growing seasons to the south. But up north in Maine, potatoes can grow through summer and can be harvested in late September and October.

Field of potato blossoms
Reddale potatoes in blossom at Wood Prairie Farm.

The Difference Between Seed Potatoes and New Potatoes
To make seed potatoes, farmers kill the top growth of potato plants before the tubers have grown to full size. They are left in the ground for a few weeks so the moisture content in the skin will decrease. This toughens up the tubers so they can stand up to the rigors of mechanical harvesting and long-term storage.

“New potatoes” were harvested while the plants still had green foliage, which has not been killed, cut or removed. The tubers are immature and tender, with skins that can be rubbed off with a thumb. Having access to true new potatoes is one of the advantages of growing potatoes at home.

In Year in the Life of a Seed Potato Farmer
The growing cycle of seed potatoes in Northern Maine starts in mid-April. It takes about a month to warm up the tubers for planting, so that’s when Wood Prairie Family Farm takes out about 25,000 or 30,000 pounds of seed potatoes to “green sprout.”

When the weather has dried out and the soil is 50 degrees at 7 a.m. at a depth of 4 inches, the conditions are right for planting. This is usually May 15-18. It then takes a few weeks to get everything planted, wrapping up in early June. 

In August, crews “kill down” the fields. Organic farmers use propane torches to kill the top growth of the plants, or they can use mechanical beaters; however, using beaters runs the risk of spreading mosaic virus.

Tubers, once harvested, require a dormancy period of four to eight weeks before they will sprout and grow. 

To encourage seed potatoes to sprout, they can be treated with gibberellic acid, which is derived from seaweed. But by Thanksgiving, tubers that have been in storage will sprout readily with no treatment.

Wood Prairie Family Farm works seven days in Early March to keep up with shipping orders.  

potatoes field with tractor
Roguing potatoes (identifying and disposing of abnormal plants) 20-plus years ago on the farm. Caleb, who is driving the tractor at 6 years old, now runs the family farm.


Jim’s Instruction for Planting Seed Potatoes
Gardeners can take tubers out of cold storage a week or two before planting and warm them up to encourage sprouting. Once they have sprouted, the tubers should be put under light so the sprouts stay compact.

A tuber the size of an egg should be cut in half before planting. A smaller tuber should be left whole. A tuber that is any bigger than an egg should be cut into multiple sections, each equal in size to half an egg. Every cut piece should weigh approximately 1.5 ounces.

In sandy soil, gardeners can cut seed potatoes and plant them immediately. But in clay soil, which holds water, Jim advises letting the cuts callous over for three or four days before planting. 

Another trick Jim recommends is dipping the exposed cut in agricultural lime to desiccate it, making it less welcoming to pathogenic fungi. Plus, potatoes love the calcium in lime.

The seed pieces should be planted between 2 and 4 inches deep. Any deeper risks the tubers sitting in wet soil, though in the South Jim says gardeners should plant as deep as 6 inches and cover the area with straw mulch to keep them from drying out completely.

Hilling Up Potatoes
“Hill up” potato plants by adding soil around the stem once the top growth is 4 to 6 inches above the soil. This will prevent sunburn and the hills will drain water more readily. Straw, peat moss or leaves topping the hill will prevent sunburn and rotting.

Older, heirloom potato varieties will grow tubers up the stem, so hilling up is all the more important when growing those varieties. Most modern varieties set tubers deep in the hill

Fertilizing Potatoes
Potatoes perform their best when given plant food and a lot of water. They require calcium, potassium and phosphorus, but not too much nitrogen. Fishmeal is a good potato fertilizer, and Wood Prairie Family Farm sells a proprietary organic fertilizer formulation.

potato tubers
Potatoes like plant food and a lot of water.

Controlling Common Potato Pest & Disease Issues
Colorado potato beetle – Handpick beetles at least twice a week, and the pest population will never develop pesticide resistance. For large-scale pest infestations, organic growers can use Entrust or another organic insecticide containing spinosad, but the beetle population will become resistant over time.

Potato leafhopper – Potato leafhoppers are fast, tiny, hard-to-see bugs that show up in warm weather. If control is necessary, there’s PyGanic 5.0, an organic, broad-spectrum contact insecticide made from pyrethrin.

Potato late blight – This occurs in moist weather when fungal spores are present. Certified organic farmers may use copper-based fungal controls for late blight, though must be sprayed on foliage before infection. 

Potato scab – Scab is a bacterial disease typically introduced to soil on seed potatoes. Minimize scab by having adequate phosphorus and mycorrhizal fungi. Scab likes alternating wet and dry conditions and raw horse manure, so let horse manure rot down into compost before using it as a fertilizer. Scabby potatoes are still edible.

How to Harvest & Store Potatoes
Potato tubers are edible from the time they are the size of a pea. When potato plants blossom, the tubers will be ping-pong ball size. Then about six weeks after flowering, the foliage dies back and the tubers will reach their full size.

Tubers can stay in the ground for four to six weeks after the top growth has died. During this time, the skin dries out and toughens up, making the tubers better suited for storage and less prone to bruising. But if there are heavy rains in the forecast or the ground is expected to freeze, harvest them sooner. 

If just looking for a couple of potatoes to have with dinner, reach gently into a hill and feel around for large tubers, pull them out, and leave the rest of the plant to continue growing. To take a whole plant out of the ground, loosen up the soil with a garden fork and lift the plant by the dead foliage. Dig around gently for any tubers left behind.

To store tubers to enjoy through fall and winter, hold off on harvesting until four to six weeks after the foliage has died naturally so the tubers will have had time to toughen up. 

Potatoes can last in storage for up to 10 months in cool, dark conditions: 38° and high humidity.  

I’ve already sown countless seeds this year, with still more to go, and many seedlings are taking off in the warm, bright environment of my new greenhouse. Greenhouse growing is a new experience for me, and I talked all about it and shared seed starting updates with my friend Craig LeHoullier, a frequent guest on the podcast and an expert seed starter and tomato grower. 


Craig lives in Hendersonville, North Carolina, and has been gardening since 1981. He literally wrote the book on growing tomatoes, “Epic Tomatoes: How to Select and Grow the Best Varieties of All Time.” He also penned the gardening book “Growing Vegetables in Straw Bales,” plus he’s the tomato adviser to the Seed Savers Exchange and a co-leader of the Dwarf Tomato Project. Together, Craig and I co-lead the Online Gardening Academy Course Growing Epic Tomatoes.


At this time of year, I’m thinking about tomato seedlings and the dense planting technique that Craig advocates. That’s why I thought now would be the perfect time for us to catch up and to welcome Craig back to the podcast.

Craig and his wife, Sue, caught COVID in January, so this year has gotten off to a slow start for them. Craig is stepping back from traveling to give talks and presentations, but he’s still as busy as ever growing and experimenting.

Different Busy
Craig’s always busy, but he anticipates this season will be “different busy.”

Craig has a huge seed collection, and he gets a lot of emails requesting seeds of different varieties. In 2022 and 2023 combined, he received 300 messages requesting seeds, and many of the requestors asked for five or 10 samples each. It takes a long time to locate those seeds and label packages for mailing, but he’s finally done with that activity for the year.

Already, Craig has greens, beets, chard, kale, collards, and some slow flowers like pansies and snapped dragons, all dense planted, and soon to be transplanted. 

He also has two batches of tomatoes, peppers and eggplant underway, one using seeds that are between 10 and 12 years old.

“I’ve created this wild set of tomato family trees, and I always try to go back as far as I can to get something that’s truest to what was sent to me,” he says. “So I’ve got a flat of the oldies that are going to take probably not three to four days to germinate, but maybe eight, 10 or 12 days, if they germinate at all.” 

He’s growing many more plants this year than he originally planned on because of some local opportunities that opened up for him.

“Because COVID is largely over, now all of a sudden Hendersonville is trying to tap into me as a resource,” he says.

He’s scheduled to do a number of local talks to neighborhood garden clubs and other groups, and a veterans healing farm down the street from him is letting him use their greenhouse to plant 120 tomato plants there.

And that’s not all.

“There’s a local farm that wants to do a dwarf tomato trial, so I brought them 10 seeds each of 20 varieties,” he says. 

Craig and I worked closely together for two years on our Growing Epic Tomatoes course, but he points out that now we’ll be working more in parallel and occasionally touching base.

He’s also appearing over Zoom for different groups, including one in Texas, but he says he turned down an offer to travel to Arizona because he’s officially a “homebody” now and will no longer travel for events.

Of his new plans he says, it’s a “different type of music, maybe, but still lots of music.”

One of the things I love about gardening is that no two years are the same, let alone no two days. I applaud Craig for exploring new ways to keep his gardening life interesting.

How Having a Greenhouse Has Changed My Approach to Gardening
Craig is expecting temperatures to fall to 25°F in his garden with 20-mph winds, making for extreme windchill temperatures. This is coming after star magnolias, saucer magnolias and daffodils have already bloomed.

“The plants have not yet adjusted to what the weather patterns are doing, and it always makes me a little bit sad to see something beautifully filled out and then know that it’s going be brown,” he says.

As I get accustomed to raising seedlings in my Yoderbilt greenhouse for the first time, as all greenhouses are notorious for, I’m struggling with keeping the space warm overnight. I’ve brought in propane heaters for supplemental heat to protect my tomato, pepper and cool-season crop seedlings as the temperature dips to 27° F. I am working on insulating the greenhouse and am looking forward to that being done so I can get my benches, work tables and seed trays where I want them.

Craig poses an interesting question: How is this greenhouse changing my gardening approach, and how am I working it into my normal planting and growing patterns?

I admit there is a big learning curve to seed starting in a greenhouse. I have been seed starting indoors under lights for years, and I am very confident in doing that. Now I see the greenhouse has a complement to what I am doing indoors.

I enjoy the controlled environment inside, including in July when I can start fall cool-season crops indoors — something I couldn’t do in a greenhouse.

I’m still seed starting under grow lights, and then I get them out into the greenhouse as quickly as I can. Inside the greenhouse is 70% of full sunlight, so I know my seedlings won’t be cooked in there this time of year.

The seedlings are blowing up in a beautiful way so it’s hard not to go out there about 20 times a day. I really do love having this greenhouse. It’s everything I had hoped for and more. And that’s saying a lot!

Typically, I start my peppers around the first of the year because they take a lot longer to germinate than most seeds. However, they tend to just sit there. By mid-April, all I have are seedlings that are just an inch or two tall, and that’s not very impressive when I hold my annual seedling sale. They take off once it gets hot, but it’s awkward to explain that while handing off these tiny things.

But this year, in my greenhouse, those pepper plants are gorgeous already. Fingers crossed, it will be the same case with my tomato plants. It is quite a dramatic difference, from seeing how my plants perform under grow lights to seeing them perform in a greenhouse.

 

2022 was the year I finally got the Yoderbilt greenhouse I had been dreaming about, and I am using it in my seed starting
Finally getting the Yoderbilt greenhouse I have long dreamed of having has complemented my approach to seed starting in some respects.

 

Managing Pests and Heat
When pests find a warm greenhouse, they want to stay and make babies. My strategy is to use rosemary oil from Earth’s Ally, a botanical oil that smells good and effectively coats soft-bodied pests. I may bring in some beneficial insects from an insectary if beneficials don’t show up on their own.

Craig says he’ll be watching from not too far away, vicariously greenhouse managing through what I’m sharing about it.

One concern Craig raises is what a changing climate will mean for tomato growers.

“If areas of the country do become too hot to grow tomatoes well outside because of pollen death, using indoor planting is going to be one of the things that people are going to have to figure out,” he says.

This includes cooling plants down so they’re running at an optimum temperature, he explains.

I wonder already how I will cool my greenhouse this summer. When it’s 46° outside, the greenhouse reaches 90° or more. I have windows I can open and a back vent to pull hot air out, but what’s it going to be like when the outdoor temperature is 90°?

 

Aphids
Aphids are a common garden pest, but in a greenhouse, their population can really take off if the infestation is not addressed early.

 

Growing 50-Plus Tomato Varieties
Last year I had 25 varieties of tomatoes for my plant sale, and this year I’m up to 54, including 18 dwarf varieties for the first time. If I am ever going to cut back, this certainly isn’t the year for it.

However, I won’t have as much room to grow tomatoes in my garden this year because where I had livestock panels, grow bags and straw bales, new flower beds are going in around the entire interior perimeter of the garden. I have 12 bags of Soil³ right now sitting in my driveway that are going to go into those beds. 

I can’t resist planting one of everything, so I know I’ll grow at least 54 tomato plants in my garden — and more than one of my favorite varieties, like Cherokee Purple, Black Krim and Sun Gold. 

Craig originally planned on growing enough plants for his own garden, which he intends to re-orient this year. But between the veteran’s farm hoop house and the other farm that wants to do the dwarf tomato trial, he can now use those remote locations to grow some of the varieties he wanted to raise for seed saving, and he can dedicate his own yard to nothing but research and development.

“I expected to really close things down, and now things have kind of been blown way open for me again,” Craig says.

He also plans to grow melons again for the first time in many years. He will grow them in straw bales and see how they perform. He already knows that tomatoes do really well in straw bales in his climate. He’ll use 4-foot-tall tomato cages to keep the melons from sprawling on the ground. He plans to grow Minnesota Midgets and old varieties like Eden’s Gem and Jenny Lind.

“Some of those older varieties are just really, really tasty,” Craig says. “It’s just that they’ve been supplanted by the increasingly expensive hybrids. I don’t know if you’ve looked at a seed catalog lately: Holy crap, man. The price of hybrid seed is going through the roof.”

He says he’s happy to be a grower who mostly uses open-pollinated seeds, and to be a seed saver. 

“Not that creative breeding doesn’t deserve reward, and not that people who breed things don’t deserve to have their efforts compensated for,” he says.” “But as a gardener with choice, I’m going to stick with the history stuff and saving seeds from it and spreading them around — and leave the hybrids to those who feel like they have to grow them either through disease issues or getting at the highest possible yield for a square foot.”

For gardeners who are looking for certain traits in their plants, which as disease resistance, now is a good time.

“What a time to garden!” Craig says. “There are varieties for every desire, every need. What a great time to take advantage of all of that diversity.”

 

[NAME] inspecting his tomato plants
I can’t help but grow more tomato plants than I’ll ever need. I sowed dozens of varieties for my annual plant sale, and I’ll keep at least one of each for myself. (photo: Tobi McDaniel)

 

Craig’s Research
Craig uses spreadsheets and family trees to help him track what he grows, its lineage, and what he must grow and what he wishes to grow for research. 

“It’s a Rubik’s cube that is only getting more complicated with each passing year,’ he says.

One year Craig crossed indeterminate heirloom tomato varieties with other indeterminate heirloom tomatoes and grew out all eight hybrids and loves them. Since then he’s only grown out saved seeds from three or four of them, and now he wants to go back and grow out saved seeds from the others.

Last year Craig grew out Cherokee Purple crossed with Lillian’s Yellow, and produced a new variety he’s calling Lillian Rose. It’s potato leaved, pink on the outside and yellowish on the inside. It’s still only on the third generation, so there is more work to be done.

“I’ve shared seeds of that with lots of people around the country, even around the world,” Craig says. “There must be at least 30, 40, 50 people that are helping me in searching.”

He’s also experimenting with Dwarf Tomato Project varieties. And there are some of his favorites, like Cherokee Chocolate and Cherokee Green.

 

Tomatoes in straw bales
Craig grows tomatoes in straw bales, which means he doesn’t have the soil-borne disease issues most gardeners confront.

 

Seed Pretreatment
Craig researched seed pretreatment in a bonus module for the Growing Epic Tomatoes course. He found that the best way to remove the greatest number of potential diseases from a seed is to expose it to 122° water for 25 minutes.

“But if you’re growing a lot of plants, that’s hard to do,” he says. “So do you pick and choose? If I save seed off a plant that might have had fusarium or a heavy dose of early blight, should I go ahead and do that?”

His plan is to use a sous vide, a device made for cooking that circulates water and holds it at a consistent temperature. He’ll put the seeds in muslin bags and drop them into the water.

“The literature is maddeningly absent of a lot of this type of information just because there’s so much you could research. So those of us that are playing this playground are, are kind of building some of this in ourselves. Getting the definite list of which disease can get into a seed coat: That was really, really hard because you can go to five different websites and see five different lists.”

Lists don’t agree on what pathogens can be removed by hot water or bleach, but Craig is doing the work to figure it out.

 

poblano pepper seeds
Saved seeds can be treated with hot water to kill seed-borne pathogens.

 

Vermicompost in Seed Starting Mix
Now that I have access to a consistent supply of vermicompost from my friend Jack Chamber’s company TerraThrive, I am adding it to all my seed starting mixes. 

I now use 20% vermicompost in my seed starting mix, and I am absolutely convinced that the vermicompost’s contribution to soil microbiology is making a difference once the roots hit it.

I am also experimenting with soaking seeds in vermicompost extract. Seeds that I soaked overnight in 20% dilution of extract germinated faster and grew more vigorously. 

Craig says tea, gibberellic acid (rooting hormone) and nitrate can all assist seeds, though precision remains a problem.

 

Vermicompost, or earthworm castings, can be an input for seed starting media
Vermicompost can be used in seed starting media to introduce beneficial microbiology.

 

Tomato Disease Resistance
“A lot of people have asked me, what have you done in the Dwarf Project to breed disease resistance into the dwarfs?” Craig says.

He says the project is not even touching that yet.

“That is such hard work to do,” he says. “You need fields where you can plant hundreds of plants, and you need to have known disease in that field. You have to know you have septoria or early blight or fusarium or nematodes. You have to run controls. You have to have stock that you know has resistance or tolerance that you breed in. So this is why, to me, the seed breeders working on that sort of thing do deserve the big buck bucks. Because it’s really, really, really hard to do.”

The Dwarf Tomato Project wanted to focus on the fun stuff: What color are they? What do they taste like? What shape are they?  How’s the beauty of it? The fascination of it, the diversity of it? What does it taste like? 

“That after all initially is what gets gardeners interested in gardening,” he said.

 

Anthracnose
Breeding disease resistance into a tomato variety is a tall order.

 

Absence of Pest or Disease Problems
Craig says that he rarely gets a criticism in a review for his book “Growing Epic Tomatoes”  the reviewers say he didn’t write enough about a certain pest of disease. He says they weren’t included in his book because he didn’t have to grapple with those specific issues in his garden. He’d much rather refer readers to experts on the topics.

“Gardening is such an incredibly broad topic that there is always going to be something that is not in your bailiwick and then you feel kind of guilty because you can’t cover it to the extent that you think people need it covered,” Craig says.

Having hosted “Growing a Greener World” for 12 years and going, I want people to learn about pest and disease management all around the country — because I know the viewers are from all around the country. But my home garden is in the Southeast and won’t experience the regional problems others confront.

With my upcoming Organic Vegetable Gardening course, I struggled with the fact that I could not demonstrate the top pests and top disease issues for each vegetable that I was demonstrating how to grow. I finally reconciled with the fact that I can’t cover everything because of the diversity.

Craig points out that during office hours in the Organic Gardening Academy, students become teachers in the group because they have knowledge that they can share with gardeners who confront the same issues there do where they live. 

 

hornworm on tomato plant
Craig and I don’t see the same tomato pests as our readers and viewers, so it’s hard for us to share information on combatting every pest there is. (photo: Amy Prentice)

Craig’s Growing Mix Preferences
Craig’s growing mix of choice was long Metro-Mix 360, but he’s found two suitable replacements. He spoke with SunGro, the maker of Metro-Mix 360, and learned the company had become unhappy with its supply of vermiculite, maybe due to a supply-chain issue. It was not up to their standards, so they stopped putting vermiculite in the mix.

SunGro recommended Metro-Mix 830 instead, which is similar to Fafard #3B and contains perlite rather than vermiculite. Craig says he liked it, and seed starting and transplanting went OK, but the mix is a bit chunkier. The shredded wood is not as fine, so when he is starting seeds he sieves the mix first. He also found the mix absorbs more water.

Craig also tried Sunshine Mix #5, called propagation mix. It comes sieved like Metro-Mix 360, which he likes. He suspects he will need to use warm water to pre-wet it because it appears to be water-repellent.

Coir & Peat
I don’t like to use the word hate, but I’ve hated the coir I have tried so far. Anyone who has followed along as I have trialed coir has seen how stunted the seedlings get. They germinate, and then they remain half an inch tall for a long time. 

It comes down to the salinity content of the coir and the lack of buffering. These are issues that should be resolved before the product reaches consumers. The producers want to get coir out for sale while spending the least amount possible on the product. The end result is a very unsatisfactory user experience. Who wants to go back and buy that stuff if they’re not having success with it?

“It should not come to the gardener to have to figure this out by trial and error in debt or stunted seedlings,” Craig says. “It should be the R&D behind these products that does this work so that you get a handy little cheat sheet saying this is what’s different about using this.”

I’m trying to dial down on how much peat I use, but frankly, I love working with peat. It works well and is a proven product, although I acknowledge its environmental downsides.

I’m still bullish on Plentiful PittMoss, which is a paper-based, non-peat, non-coir product. Once you get over the slight learning curve of how to use it and how to water it, it’s amazing. The results have actually been better than anything else I’ve ever had. 

I also just started sowing directly into Soil³. They have a new veggie mix with better drainage, and when I have used it, the seeds in Soil³ are the first to germinate. 

Soil is not available everywhere, so as much as I recommend it, I know it’s not accessible to everyone. Craig makes this point: “Gardeners garden where they garden, and we can’t know what their mix of material is where they’re gardening, but I have to always remind myself, this is what I use. I can’t assume that this is what everybody else around the country has at their disposal.” 

Those of us who control a patch of land can’t count on there being someplace else for wildlife to find a home. There are too few wild spaces left, so it’s up to each of us to steward our properties in a way that fosters biodiversity. That’s the message shared by my guest this week, gardener, landscape designer and activist Mary Reynolds, the founder of We Are the ARK (Acts of Restorative Kindness).

Mary urges us to be not just gardeners, but guardians at the forefront of the restoration of the natural, magical world. She says setting land free to be its true nature restores our own true natures and reminds us who we truly are. Mary is the author of “The Garden Awakening: Designs to Nurture Our Land and Ourselves” and “We Are the ARK: Returning Our Gardens to Their True Nature with Acts of Restorative Kindness” and she’s the subject of the 2016 movie “Dare to Be Wild,” a dramatization of how she went from being an outsider to winning a gold medal at the Chelsea Flower Show.

Mary grew up in the southeast of Ireland and says as is typical for an Irish family, there was a clatter of children. She was the youngest of six, and her parents were farmers who also worked full-time. Given that her parents were just so busy, she had a lot of unsupervised time. “You had complete freedom, really, because nobody ever knew where you were,” she recalls. She says that as a result, she made her connections with the natural world, as opposed to people.

Mary says one of her most formative experiences came when she was around 6 years old and walked to the top of the farm. She knows it happened in May because she remembers the smell of the hawthorn flowers. She went through a gap in the field that her father would drive through on his tractor, but when she turned back around, the gap had closed behind her. The plants and shrubs had closed in on her, with no way out. 

“I remember being frightened and I was confused, and I walked around the field and tried to find my way out, and I couldn’t,” she says. “And I was crying and nobody could hear me because, you know, nobody was around. And eventually, I got distracted by the sunshine and the butterflies and the bees, and then sat down in the meadow and just kind of spaced off, which seems how I spent most of my life.”

Though she couldn’t see anyone, she felt like she was being watched. She looked around and realized that it was the plants themselves that she felt were watching her.

“I understood that these plants had spirits and personalities, and just the same way as humans, they were all sentient and individual,” she says. “And they were all looking for my attention, which is the bit that stuck with me because nobody ever took any notice of me.”

She eventually heard a neighbor shouting across the field and all of a sudden the gap was back, and she walked back out of the field. She didn’t tell anyone what had happened until years later when she mentioned it to her father — who told her that the same thing had happened to his grandfather in that field. 

Locally, it was known as a fairy field.

“Those places of magic existed a lot in Ireland, but as the wildness disappears, the magic disappears too,” Mary says. “So we’ve lost a lot of that magic here.”

Mary’s experience as a young child not only left an impression, it blazed a path for her future. That path has led her to great things, including becoming the youngest woman to earn a gold medal at the 2002 Chelsea Flower Show in London on the eve of turning 28.

 

wild spaces
When wild spaces are cleared, a little magic is lost to the world. (Photo Credit: Claire Leadbitter)

 

Before going further with Mary’s story, I want to pause a moment to remind you that I have a new book out, “The Vegetable Gardening Book: Your complete guide to growing an edible organic garden from seed to harvest.” It’s chock full of insider tips and new-to-you information that will help you step up your gardening game and tackle challenges. 

And on tap for this spring is my new Online Gardening Academy™ premium course, Organic Vegetable Gardening. Sign up for the waitlist here.

Finding Her Way
Mary had dropped out of college in short order, but her parents encouraged her to go back the next year. However, she didn’t know what she wanted to do. “I fancied this boy studying landscape design, and so I thought, ‘I’ll do that. That’ll do,’” she says. “So it wasn’t like I had a great calling, but I went and did a degree in landscape design, and then I set up my business straight away.”

She is a gifted designer, so it was easy for her to find work. She notes that she didn’t “bully” clients. “I don’t assert my vision upon what I think should be done,” she says. “Every time I’d come back to a client, they’d have seen a different television program the night before, and they’d have changed their minds. And it was driving me demented.” 

Then Mary had a dream that delivered a message: Gardens are poor reflections of true nature.

She listened to that message, which set her on a path to finding a different relationship with how we interact with our own patches of the planet.

“I tried to get my clients to do gardens that were wild, and nobody would let me,” she says. “So I thought, well, how am I gonna do this?”

The only flower show she had ever heard of was the Chelsea Flower Show, so she gave the show organizers a call and asked for an application form. She was told by a man there that she sounded young and naive and that there was no point in sending her a form.

“You know, you don’t say that to me,” she says with a laugh.

Mary was persistent and kept calling back until she got through to a secretary who agreed to fax her the application form. Mary created her garden design and completed the form on a tight deadline, including forged sponsorship documents from a company in Beirut, Lebanon. 

The design was a simple idea that built on a similar idea she previously used for a television program. And before mailing her design drawings, she collected wild mint, dried it in the oven, and rolled bunches of it inside the drawings.

“Mint has an intention of its own, and the intention is to remove people’s negative connotations,” she explains.

Her design was accepted but she had another problem: raising the necessary funds without the Royal Horticultural Society realizing she didn’t actually have a sponsor. Ultimately, she pulled it off.

 

seeds goldfinch teasels
Seed heads left standing all winter provide food for goldfinches and other birds. (Photo Credit: Claire Leadbitter)

 

A Gold Medal Garden
“I told everybody building the garden that they were to build it with the intention to remind people of the importance of wild places and how we need to protect them before they’re all gone,” Mary says. “And so that came out of it — the intention poured out of that space.”

Those who came up to the garden for a look would cry and say they remembered places just like it from when they were young but now those places are gone, she recalls.

“They all wanted to tell me stories of this tree at the bottom of their granny’s garden, where there was all this magical energy around it, and wild places that were near the village that they lived,” she says.

But Irish people would say the garden was just like home, as Ireland still had that bit of magic back then, she says.

For the making of “Dare to Be Wild,” the filmmakers recreated Mary’s gold medal-winning garden, so viewers of the movie will have a real sense of what it was like.

“Garden Awakening”
“I realized that I was building these relationships with all these little pieces of land, and then I was handing them back to somebody who hadn’t built the relationship themselves,” Mary says. “It wasn’t working for the land, it wasn’t working for me, and the land itself did not want to remain as I had envisaged it to be. It had intentions of its own, and I was suppressing those intentions and forcing them to stay as I had designed them.”

Mary thought there was something wrong with that way of working, so she shifted her focus to writing. She wrote “Garden Awakening” to share a mixture of old ways of working the land, and magic and intention. It includes natural ways of approaching gardening, such as forest gardening. 

“It was kind of the book that I had always wanted myself, and it wasn’t out there, so I wrote it,” Mary says.

Mary Reynolds
Mary Reynolds with her first ARK. (Photo Credit: Claire Leadbitter)

“We Are the ARK”
Mary followed up “Garden Awakening” with “We Are the Ark,” published last year. She was inspired to write the new book after witnessing wildlife flee from a lot being cleared in winter for development.

While looking down over her garden, Mary saw a fox run by, which was odd to see in the daytime, and chasing the fox were two hares, followed by a hedgehog — which is nocturnal and should have been hibernating anyway. 

The animals were being displaced as a thicket of native plants and trees was being cleared to build a house.

“They’d gone in with a digger, and they’d cleared it out within minutes, really, and without any thought for all the creatures that called it home,” Mary says. “And I stood there and realized, ‘Oh man, I’ve done this myself so many times — and that’s enough of that.’”

She reflected on the land she had disturbed to build gardens and on the animals that had resided there.

“I presumed that they all lived somewhere else, and when I stood outside and saw them running away, I realized that the ‘somewhere else’ was disappearing,” Mary says.

She was heartbroken thinking of what she had done herself, and she started to research the collapse of biodiversity and the fact that displaced creatures have no place to go when their habitats are removed.

“The forests over here are not forests, they’re plantations. They’re monocultures,” she says. “There is nowhere safe because there’s no life in those places, and they can’t go into our gardens because we’ve tidied them and filled them with non-native plants, which don’t support the web of life to be abundant and healthy. And so all these creatures that we’re completely and hopelessly dependent upon are clinging on at the edges.”

Mary decided to change everything she was doing and founded a movement called We Are the ARK, with “ARK” standing for “acts of restorative kindness to the earth.” The movement asks people to give half of any land they have under their care back to nature.

 


(Video by Delvin and Grace)
 
 

Giving Land Back to Nature
Mary says the blame for environmental degradation is often placed on individuals but it’s hard for individuals to be powerful enough to do something effective. We Are the ARK empowers individuals because they can see with their own eyes how nature can recover when they create their own “ARKs” on their properties — like Noah’s Ark.

Then when they walk past their neighbors’ yards and the parks that are kept cut down to nothing for no other reason than a historical class system, they will wonder why they don’t just give back unused spaces to wildlife, Mary says.

“Why can’t we give those places back?” she wonders. “If we don’t need them, let’s just give them back. And we have to step into our role as guardians of this planet, and step out of this idea of being a gardener.”

In addition to giving half of their property back to nature, We Are the ARK encourages landowners to use the other half of their land to grow food in a regenerative, organic way.

It’s growing our own food and supporting local, regenerative, organic farmers that will get us away from industrial farming, forestry, fishing systems that are killing everything on the planet, Mary says. 

 

sparrow hawk
A sparrow hawk rests on a pile of deadwood. When we allow deadwood to stay in place, it provides valuable wildlife habitat.

 

How to Build an ARK
Even a balcony planter box can be an ARK. Just plant some milkweed and wait for monarch butterflies to lay their eggs. 

“A small space like that allows people to form a relationship with whatever creatures come to live there,” Mary says.

The visitors may also be birds coming to use a birdbath or feeder you’ve provided for them.

“Anything you can do to bring nature into your world is going to empower you because you know that reconnection is very important,” Mary says.

Mary and We Are the ARK present simple steps for anyone to create an ARK on their piece of earth.

“Even if you can’t give half, just give some — as much as you can manage — and I promise you, you’ll be so enamored by the amount of life in that little patch, you will expand it.”

The first step is to do nothing at all.

“Get to know your land and actually watch it and find out which parts are wet or which parts are shady, which parts are trying to do certain things,” Mary says. “And then, you have to understand the concept that if you wanted to do proper, what people call ‘rewilding,’ you’d need at least 1,500 acres because you’d have to have the full cycle of life, including the apex predators and everything in place in order to maintain the balance. So without them, you have to step in and become all those creatures in your tiny little patch of the earth, and that sounds complicated, but it actually isn’t. All it means is that when all those creatures are in place, they create niche ecosystems throughout their territory. So you can do this in your garden by looking at the different layers that there should be in order to support all the different creatures.”

The layers are bare earth; mown grassy areas where large herbivores graze; ARK meadows (wild areas free of non-native plants); scrubby, shrubby areas; and woodland. In between all that are habitats such as ponds, stone walls and deadwood.

Transitional areas are called ecotones. There are some creatures that are unique to those crossover areas, Mary points out.

“The difference between an ARK and a garden is that in a garden your intention is about creating something which you feel is beautiful or controlled … and in an ARK, the intention is about supporting as much life as possible and bringing true nature, bringing the earth’s true nature back to life,” she says.

One of the greatest obstacles is shame, according to Mary. People are ashamed to have a bunch of “weeds” growing on their land. She encourages putting up a sign that explains to curious neighbors what an ARK is. “It instantly makes sense of what they’re seeing,” she says. 

Another important step is removing non-native, invasive plants. 

In a healthy system, the seed bank in the soil contains about 5,000 “weed” seeds, which are activated when the earth is exposed to light. The seeds will grow into plants that reduce soil compaction and bring minerals back to the surface. The problem in many North American gardens is that plants that were brought to the continent from elsewhere have taken over. 

“They have no relationship with the local food web, so they don’t really support any life and they suppress the native plant communities because they go rampant,” Mary says.

Aggressive non-native plants that outcompete native plants are called invasive plants, and until they are removed, an ARK can’t take hold. It can take years of repetitive weeding to get invasives under control and to allow native plants to take over again.

One more step is to create holes in a property to resolve the “island-ization” problem, which refers to the solid walls and fences that stop wildlife from traveling freely. Create corridors in conjunction with neighbors who are sympathetic to the cause. Use living walls of hedges rather than fences so animals can pass through.

Because artificial light is a contributor to the collapse of biodiversity, reducing or eliminating artificial lighting is another step. Artificial light blinds nighttime pollinators, it leads to there being no insects around for bats to eat, it causes hormone disruption in nocturnal creatures, etc. 

When I go on vacation on the coast in the summertime when sea turtles are hatching, I am very aware of the local alerts letting people know to turn off their outdoor lights overnight so the sea turtles head toward the ocean where they belong and not toward the artificial light.

When you have an ARK that your neighbors can see, you spread knowledge and compassion for nature. Even notoriously difficult to deal with homeowners associations can come around on ARKs.

“Everybody has a heart and everybody has the capacity to change,” Mary says.
