Strolling the aisles at the garden center to browse for flowers to plant in the spring is undoubtedly fun, but growing them from seed presents a few advantages. For one, it means you can choose from an abundance of varieties. I make flower lists of seeds, just like I do with vegetable and herb lists. Here, I’ve gathered a few of the easiest flowers to grow from seed. Some are so easy to plant, it literally involves dropping seeds from where you stand in the garden.

I still make some—okay, a lot!—of impulse purchases at the garden center when it comes time to plant up my garden. But I like being able to determine what I want to, so I’m not disappointed if I don’t find what I’m looking for.

dianthus and petunia grown from seed
A Dianthus Supra Pink flower and an Evening Scentsation petunia (that has a sweet fragrance). I grew them both and paired them in a container. They are among the easiest flowers to grow from seed.
The advantages of growing flowers from seed
To me, growing flowers from seed is just as rewarding as growing veggies. I plant them in my gardens, use them in container combinations, and dig them into my raised beds both to harvest for summer bouquets, and to attract pollinators to my vegetables and herbs. Here are some other benefits:

You get to choose what you grow. You’re not at the whim of what the buyer at your local garden center ordered—though there are many with excellent vision and taste! But you can map out what you’d like and where you’re going to put it.
Browsing a catalog, you may discover some varieties you’ve never heard of or seen. It’s fun to plant new things.
You can customize your own plant order. Grow a whole flat of one thing—or a single cell.
You control everything about your planting process, from the growing medium you choose to how you fertilize.
You can stagger plantings so that not all of one flower variety blooms at once!
You can pre-plan your containers because you’ll know exactly what you’ll have in your “inventory.”
You can determine what grows best in your garden from season to season and tailor your future seed orders accordingly.

planting zinnia seeds in soil blocks
There are three options for when to plant zinnia seeds: indoors (as shown here), by direct sowing, and by succession planting through early summer.
Tips for growing flowers from seed
I think the main piece of advice is to read the seed packets carefully. Some seeds benefit from being given a head start indoors, some can be winter sown, while others can be direct sown in the garden, starting in the spring. For the latter scenario, know your growing zone and count backwards from your region’s last frost date to determine your seed-starting timing.

If you’re starting flower seeds indoors, make sure you harden off your seedlings before planting them in their summer destination. Don’t miss this important step!


Don’t forget to deadhead blooms of cut flowers during the growing season to encourage more growth!

The easiest flowers to grow from seed
These are by no means the only easy flowers to grow from seed, but this is a list of blooms I’ve grown myself and have had success with in my gardens over the years.

Zinnias
Zinnias are probably my favorite cut flowers to grow. There are so many gorgeous varieties to choose from, like Queeny Lime Orange and the Profusion series, both AAS Winners. I love planting dwarf zinnias in border plantings, and showy varieties like Oklahoma Salmon that are perfect picks for a cut flower garden. Zinnia seeds can be started indoors or direct sown in the garden once the soil warms up. Plant them in full sun.

a bouquet of zinnias
I love growing zinnias as a cut flower for summer vases. I display them both indoors and out! And I leave some in the garden because hummingbirds, bees, and butterflies love them! The plants continue to produce through late summer and into fall.
Cosmos
Cosmos are another raised bed favorite of mine. I love their delicate-looking wispy leaves that doesn’t seem strong enough to support the blooms. And you can choose based on petal types. I’m partial to the fluted petals of Sea Shells. I’ve had varieties self sow and reappear the following year. I also plant cosmos in my ornamental gardens for that blowsy, cottage garden look. Cosmos seeds can be started indoors or direct sown in the garden. I like giving them a head start. Choose a spot that gets full sun (a little shade is okay) and be mindful of the height listed on the seed packet. You don’t want to plant them in front of anything shorter!

cosmos flower
This cosmos flower, from a package of Dancing Petticoats, was self sown from the previous summer’s blooms. Cosmos are great options for beginner gardeners.
Nasturtiums
I appreciate a plant that cascades down the side of a pot (mounding types) or that will climb a trellis. Depending on the variety you choose, nasturtiums can fit either of these visual requirements. I love how they look spilling over the side of a raised bed. A lot of them have rounded petals, but I like the serrated edges of Phoenix. For an abundance of blooms, sow seeds in full sun.

Peach Melba nasturtium
This lovely variety of nasturtium is called Peach Melba.
Sweet alyssum
Sweet alyssum is an annual that I like to purchase in flats. And while I don’t have the space to grow entire trays of alyssum under my grow lights, I can still sow several plants to add to the garden come spring. I plant it as a companion plant in my raised beds, as a filler in pots, and in empty spots at the edge of an ornamental garden. I love how it spreads to fill in spaces. And it’s low-maintenance. Choose a full-sun area to plant your seedlings.

sweet alyssum in a raised bed
Sweet alyssum adds a different texture to a garden because of its clusters of tiny flowers. It’s a perfect plant to edge gardens and raised beds.
Calendula
Plant calendula once, let it go to seed, and it’s likely it will come back for you the following year. The seeds are easy to spot and collect if you’d like to plant them in a different garden. Milkweed falls into this category too. Allow milkweeds to go to seed and they’ll basically just do their thing. Or you can winter sow milkweed seeds. Calendula plants, also called pot marigold, like full sun to partial shade and well-draining soil. And they are drought tolerant and hardy. I’ve seen them shining in my garden in December with a little bit of snow!

a bouquet of calendula
You may find calendula growing in herb gardens because of its medicinal uses. It’s also grown to create clothing dye.
Pansies
The cheerful faces of pansies and violas are a welcome site in the spring. If you think ahead, you can get an early start by growing them indoors—about 10 to 12 weeks before the last frost date. And because they don’t mind the unpredictable temperature fluctuations of spring, you can include them in a spring-themed container.

pansy flower
Because they are more of a cool-weather plant, you need to give pansies and violas more of a head start when sowing pansy seeds indoors.
Sunflowers
There’s a reason school kids often come home with a sunflower in a paper cup: They’re very easy to grow and perfect for beginners! Just dig them into a sunny spot. While I’ve had success growing sunflowers in the garden, they rarely make it unless they are well established from being started inside. Or I put a cage around them until they really get going, which I started to do in recent years. I find if a plant is a bit more established because it’s been started indoors, then it has a greater chance of survival around all the critters that frequent my gardens.

Teddy Bear sunflower
This frilly, delightful sunflower is called Teddy Bear. 
Marigolds
I think I like to grow marigolds because their interesting scent reminds me of brushing past them in our side garden as a kid. Again, this is something I would buy a flat of, so I love being able to start some from seed. My favorite in the last few years are the giant pompom varieties. I plant marigolds as border plants in raised beds and the garden.

a bee on a marigold
Marigolds produce a ton of blooms, attracting pollinators to the vegetable garden.
Petunias
Petunias are annual flowers I used to be a little fussy about. They were sticky to deadhead and would look very bedraggled by mid summer. But there are some lovely varieties that look so pretty in pots and grow a little more compactly. I often include some in my flower rotation now. Plant petunias in full sun in well-drained soil.

petunia in a hanging basket
This Easy Wave Sky Blue petunia was planted with mint in this potted wall hanging.
Poppies
Poppies are like dill. They’re one of those plants that does not like to be transplanted from a pot. And they can be a bit fickle with their germination rates. But if you get a magic packet and they all grow, you’ve hit the jackpot. Poppies can be winter sown. It’s as easy as heading out into the yard in your snow boots and parka, and scattering the seeds in the snow.

When creating a garden, there’s always an edge somewhere, whether it be a curb, sidewalk, lawn, pathway or other natural border. When planting that area, there are a few things you may want to keep in mind to make your life easier. In this article, I’m going to share some low-maintenance garden border ideas.


I’ve spoken about landscape borders, in terms of how you separate a garden from a lawn—mowing strips, pavers, and other crisp edges to delineate a garden from grass. This piece will focus on what to plant at the edge of the garden that’s not going to require a ton of work.


boxwood border around a garden
I love this magical, tiny garden that I saw in Dublin, Ireland. The boxwood hedges make a great border along both sides of the interesting path.
Things to consider when selecting low-maintenance garden border ideas
I think it’s important to note that there are no rules to creating garden borders. Your garden is a reflection of your taste. Plant options may depend on a variety of factors from soil type, to a garden’s location and size, to plant placement. Because a planted garden border is always going to be at the edge of something you want to choose the right plants for the space. Here are some things to keep in mind.

Choose plants that:


Don’t require a ton of summer maintenance—deadheading, pruning, etc.
Are drought tolerant
Don’t creep onto a sidewalk, curb or pathway
Won’t choke out the plants behind them
Won’t interfere with mowing a lawn, either by branches reaching overtop of the grass, or a groundcover spreading its tentacles through it
Are tolerant of road salt (here are some salt-tolerant plants), if they border a curb or sidewalk where municipal salt is used (or if you use it)
Won’t block any views either of other plants, or of sight lines, like at the end of a driveway or near a stop sign.
black-eyed Susans planted along a sidewalk
Here, a row black-eyed Susans have been chosen as edging plants, proving that you don’t need short varieties in a low-maintenance planting. All the plants around them are at similar heights, so nothing is hidden.
Create a border out of edible plants
Perennial herbs, like chives, lemon thyme, garlic chives, and sage, and biennial parsley—flat leaf or curly—are a delicious way to add visual interest to a garden edge. Trimming these herbs to use in the kitchen keeps them contained, while the shape and texture of their foliage adds a different level of interest compared to the leaves of other perennials.


garlic chives as an edging plant
I like garlic chives as a border plant. It’s compact and stays upright and green when it’s not in bloom.
Use groundcovers and low plants to edge a garden
In some parts of my garden beds, groundcovers are an obvious choice for filling in gaps at the edge of a garden. I have some sedums planted close to a curb and delosperma at the edge of a garden path, and sweet woodruff in a shady border. There are also low, mounding perennials that can create a stellar border. Hardy geranium varieties and heucheras are a couple of examples. In place of mulch, these types of plants can add interest while keeping weeds at bay.

delosperma 'Fire Spinner'
My delosperma ‘Fire Spinner’ in full bloom. This gorgeous plant doesn’t spread quickly, is very drought tolerant, and is easy to maintain. It’s located along the edge of my garden where it meets edging made with bricks and a gravel path with stepping stones.
Fill in holes in a garden boundary with low-maintenance annuals
Have an empty spot where you may want to add a perennial, but you’re not quite sure what to plant yet? Add some annual flowers to the mix! You want a low-maintenance border that doesn’t require a ton of deadheading (though you’ll want to for some because it means more blooms!). Some favorites include dwarf zinnias, New Guinea impatiens, supertunias, and calibrachoas.

dwarf zinnias in a garden border
Dwarf zinnias are compact, heat resistant, and don’t need to be staked! Deadheading them once will help them branch out and develop more blooms, but after that, they’re pretty low maintenance!
Add drought-tolerant perennials to hot, sunny borders
There are a ton of perennial options when it comes to adding plants to a full sun spot. Look for plants that don’t need plant supports and that can withstand long stretches with no rain. Upright perennial flowers that don’t tend to flop include shasta daisies, liatris, echinacea, lavender, thrift, and coreopsis.

lavender as an edging plant with coreopsis
Lavender is a really low-maintenance perennial that looks interesting all year round, even after the flowers fade.
Use small shrubs to line a garden
Small shrubs used as a hedge or even spaced out are a nice way to delineate a garden—depending on what’s planted behind them. Depending on your garden’s design, you want to make sure you can see everything around them. They need to be low compared to the other plants or blend in well with the overall composition. It all depends on the shape and size of the garden and the other plants that are a part of the puzzle. Boxwood, dwarf evergreen shrubs, and other low-growing, low-maintenance shrubs, like hydrangeas could work.

At Last rose in a front yard garden
My At Last rose is hardy, low maintenance, and a really attractive bush that sits at the edge of my front yard garden that runs along the side of my property towards the street. This hardy variety barely needs pruning and blooms a few times throughout the growing season. I’m going to include it in the mix because I think it’s a great contender, depending on the look you’re going for in the garden.
Opt for native plants around the periphery of your garden
If you’re unsure what to plant, native plants are a great option because they’re well adapted to your area’s growing conditions, are usually drought tolerant, attract bees, butterflies, and other beneficial insects, and are very low-maintenance. After all, they were taking care of themselves long before cultivated flower beds made an appearance. Consult the plant tags carefully to make sure that the plants will thrive in your garden’s growing conditions. Make sure your garden offers the right moisture requirements (some native plants thrive in dry soils, while others prefer a wetter environment).

blue gilia
Bluehead gilia (Gilia capitata) is a plant native to some parts of the U.S. In British Columbia, it’s a recommendation in the “Grow Me Instead” program that encourages choosing from a selection of native plants over invasive species for garden plantings.
Choose low-maintenance shade plants to outline a shade garden
Most green thumbs have at least one shade garden to contend with. And there are plenty of great specimens that will work well in shade. Read plant tags carefully to determine whether a plant can survive in full shade vs part sun, and determine the soil requirements. Does the plant prefer moist soils or is it a dry shade area?

Don’t be afraid to add tall plants to a garden border
Not everything has to be short at the edge of a garden. As long as what’s planted behind all grows to similar heights, you can plant tall perennials right up to the edge of your garden. Coreopsis, black-eyed Susans, and many ornamental grasses can blend together to give you the organized chaos look of cottage gardens. Besides perhaps some beginning or end-of-season maintenance, you can pretty much leave them be throughout the growing season.

ornamental grasses and perennials
This is another Irish garden that inspired me. Plants of similar heights, including ornamental grasses, have been planted together to form a lovely, seamless backyard garden. They’re all part of the border. I love the texture and ethereal look that ornamental grasses add. The lawn itself also had meticulous edging.
Dig in a spring bulb border
It was Dutch garden designer Jacqueline van der Kloet who inspired me to plant a bulb border along one side of my front yard garden. The bulbs appear when other perennials are just starting to peek through the soil in early spring, adding some visual interest until the rest of the garden can catch up. You can plant something more formal, where you choose all hyacinths, for example, and plant them in a row. Or, mix it up! Toss a variety of bulbs into a wheelbarrow or box and mix them around before planting.

when to plant lily bulbs
When to plant lily bulbs for the best blooms

If you’ve ever admired a breathtaking stand of lilies in bloom and wondered where, how, and when to plant lily bulbs, you’re in good company. Lily plants have captivated humankind for thousands of years. As symbols of purity, death, rebirth, and more, lilies permeate ancient texts and works of art.


Lily bulbs are hardy perennials that work well in border plantings, as cut flowers, and when grown in containers. And because there are so many different types of lilies exhibiting a riot of bloom colors and shapes—not to mention a variety of plant heights and growth habits—you’re bound to find a few you’ll want to add to your own landscape.


pink lilies in bloom
With more than 100 lily species and another 80 to 100 different subspecies from which to choose, it’s no wonder these dramatic beauties have had such staying power culturally and in our gardens.
Meet the true lilies
Not to be confused with daylilies, the lilies we’re focusing on here are in the Lilium genus and are known as the “true lilies.” (Although daylily flowers do look like some of the true lilies, they’re actually classified among a family of flowering succulent plants.) True lilies often have funnel- or trumpet-shaped flowers which appear on long, straight stalks. Many are also fragrant.

Horticulturalists have separated the true lilies into nine different divisions and then further classified them by their floral characteristics. (For a simplified version based on these official divisions, check out our article about types of lilies.)

Some of the most common true lily types include:

Asiatic hybrids: More than half of all of the different kinds of lilies originated in east Asia, so there are many Asiatic lilies from which to choose. Asiatics typically bloom in early summer, are unscented or only lightly scented, and come in a wide range of floral colors and shapes.

Martagon hybrids: Derived from Eurasian Turk’s cap lilies, Martagon lilies prefer cooler, shadier conditions and feature petals that curl upward and back. As with Asiatics hybrids, Martagons come in myriad colors; however, many in this group may also feature bold markings and light scents.

Martagon lilies
Martagon lilies have petals that curl upwards and back. They almost look as if they’re being blown by a strong wind!

Trumpet lilies: Often scented, the trumpets are a showy group primarily named for their flowers’ classic funnel-like shapes. Trumpet lilies usually begin blooming in mid- to late summer.

Oriental lilies: Oriental lily blooms are often fragrant, large, and striking. But lilies in this group can be tricky to care for. One of the best known of the Oriental lilies is the Star Gazer variety.

What does a lily bulb look like?
Similar to tulips and daffodils, lilies grow from true bulbs, rather than from corms, rhizomes, or tubers. A lily bulb is made up of a series of scales which are attached to a flat base. You might notice some dried roots emanating from this point. This is the bottom of the bulb and should face down during planting.

lily bulbs
Lily bulbs have dried roots around the base. This is the end that faces downwards when planting. If they’ve been in the package too long, bulbs will often have sprouts coming out of the top.
The best growing conditions for lilies
Lilies grow best in rich, well-draining soil, and, while most lilies thrive in full sun, Martagon lilies do well in some shade. If you live in a very hot climate and your garden gets several hours of direct sunlight, you may need to take extra care to ensure that your lilies’ roots don’t get overheated. Keep plants watered and protect their root zones with an extra layer of mulch as needed.

tall lilies in a garden
Plan to grow tall lily varieties? Position your plants near a natural windbreak to minimize stem damage during high winds.

Why knowing when to plant lily bulbs is important
To a degree, knowing when to plant lily bulbs depends on the varieties you choose. For example, many Asiatic lilies flower in early summer while others like the Beverly Dreams Orienpet lily bloom much later. As for why your planting times matter? You’ll get the very best show if your bulbs have had a good opportunity to establish healthy roots before their expected bloom times.

When to plant lily bulbs: 2 options
When determining when to plant lily bulbs, you have a couple of good choices—either in early spring or during the fall. As a general rule, late-bloomers can be planted in early spring and earlier flowering lilies should be planted in autumn. (Just don’t plant bulbs so late in the fall that they freeze before they have enough time to become established!)

blooming lilies in a garden
When in doubt, remember that the expected bloom times for the lily varieties you intend to plant can help to guide your decision.
Planting lilies in the spring
Remember that, in part at least, deciding when to plant lily bulbs depends on the bloom times of your chosen varieties. Early spring is a good time to plant any potted lily plants you may have as well as lily bulbs for varieties that won’t bloom until late summer or early fall.

Planting instructions:

Dig a few inches below the area where you’ll be positioning your bulbs and amend the soil if needed. (For heavy clay soils, mix in compost or well-rotted manure. Both of these amendments improve soil structure and drainage.)
Line the bottom of your planting bed with chicken wire to discourage moles, voles, mice, and other burrowers from snacking on your lily bulbs. (Bend the metal edges up all the way around the perimeter of your dug-out area to create a protective cage.)
Add soil to the bottom of the planting bed so that your lily bulbs can be positioned at depths appropriate for their size.
Place bulbs in the planting bed and cover with soil.
Top this area with another section of chicken wire to discourage any animals digging from above. Add a little more soil as well as a few inches of shredded bark or leaf-mold mulch.
Once your plants begin showing themselves, top dress with bone meal or a similar fertilizer. You should also make sure your plants get at least half an inch of water per week.

planting a lily bulb in the garden
When planting, dig down a few inches below the area where you’ll be planting and amend the soil, of necessary. Position your lily bulb at the right depth, according to its size. Place the bulb in the planting bed and cover with soil.
Planting lilies in the fall
Your first average frost date is another important factor to keep in mind as you consider when to plant lily bulbs. While fall is a good time to plant early-flowering lily varieties, you need to make sure new plantings will have several weeks to establish viable roots before temperatures plummet. For fall-planted bulbs, follow planting instructions one through five from the previous section.

covering a planted lily bulb
As with spring-planted bulbs, if you’re planting in the fall, bulbs benefit from a topdressing of fertilizer. And they need at least half an inch of water per week. This will ensure successful blooming and healthy plant growth in the spring.
Alternatively, you can prepare your fall planting beds in spring or summer and then top with a heavy layer of mulch to suppress weeds and keep the soil temperatures elevated. Once you’re ready to plant your bulbs in the fall, move the extra mulch aside and finish with steps three through five from the previous section.

Preparing lily bulbs for planting
Before planting your lily bulbs, examine them for signs of rotten roots, mold, or disease. Discard any bulbs that are obviously too damaged or desiccated to be viable. A healthy lily bulb should feel solid and firm to the touch. Bulbs that seem squishy or too lightweight in your hand may no longer contain enough stored nutrients to thrive. For mushy roots, you can try using a clean, sharp knife or shears to trim these away and see if they’ll grow.

How deeply to plant lily bulbs
Once you’ve decided when to plant lily bulbs, you need to determine how deeply to plant them for the very best results. Because lily bulbs vary in size, the planting depth you choose for them will also vary accordingly. Bury very small bulbs three (7.5 cm) to four inches (10 cm) below the soil line. Bury larger bulbs five (12.5 cm) or six inches (15 cm) down. (There is at least one exception to this general rule. The Madonna lily prefers shallow planting. Cover these bulbs with just an inch of soil.)planting a lily bulb using a soil knife

planting a lily bulb using a soil knife
When it’s time to plant, you can easily get the job done with a trowel, soil knife, or bulb planter, but, if you’re placing many bulbs over a large area, you might want to use a power drill fitted with a gardening auger.
How far apart to plant lilies
As with planting depth, when spacing bulbs, consider their size. Position small bulbs several inches apart. Give large bulbs a wider berth—about one-and-a-half feet apart is usually adequate.

You should also take into account any stakes you may need to include in order to support especially tall lilies. Rather than blindly driving stakes in once your plants are up, you can position stakes when planting. This will greatly reduce the likelihood of damage to your bulbs.

What could go wrong
As for the plants themselves? Here are some potential problems and ways to prevent them:

No blooms: Inadequate light or bulb damage or disease are a few possible factors. Examine your growing conditions and move your bulbs if need be.

Yellowing, stunted growth and rotted bulbs: Several viruses and fungi can cause deformed or discolored leaves and, potentially, lily death. Botrytis, also known as “lily disease,” is among the most common. It usually begins as a series of brown spots and progresses to kill whole leaves. Remove the affected foliage as soon as possible, always discarding it well away from your lily bed. Diseased plants with badly yellowed, wilted, or deformed foliage should be dug up, bulb and all.

red lily beetle
If you spot a red lily beetle on one of your plants, take action by by hand-picking them, along with the eggs and larvae, from the foliage.
Visible damage from insect pests: Soon after lily foliage emerges, the red lily beetle may make itself at home, chewing through leaves and laying their orange, oblong-shaped eggs. Mitigate infestations by hand-picking the beetles, their eggs, and larvae from the plants.

Aphids are another problem pest. They puncture leaves, facilitating the spread of disease. Hand-picking these early and often can keep their numbers down. For overwhelming infestations, you might want to apply an insecticidal soap. However, these products kill pests and beneficial insects indiscriminately.

Nibbled foliage and flowers: You’ve protected your bulbs underground, but what about above-ground varmints? Deter deer and rabbits with animal repellants, or keep them out with temporary garden fencing.

Keep lilies away from pets
From their leaves to their flower petals, stamens, and pollen, every part of a lily is toxic to cats. (Lilies can also affect dogs, but not as seriously.) If your pets chew lily leaves, sniff dropped petals, or lick up fallen pollen grains, contact your vet immediately.

When to plant lilies in container gardens
If you’re looking for a splash of color during the middle of winter, you can always force bulbs by planting them in pots indoors and topping with a little peat moss. Keep these pots in a warm, sunny spot inside and enjoy the show while you wait for warmer days to come.

But what about planting lilies in large containers outdoors? Early spring or fall are both suitable, depending on the lily variety and its anticipated bloom time. When you’re ready to plant, choose containers that have good drainage. Fill with a lightweight potting mix, and plant bulbs three (7.5 cm) to six inches (15 cm) below the soil line, depending on their bulb size. (See “How deeply to plant lily bulbs” above.)

planting lily bulbs in a container
Don’t have room in your garden for lilies? Choose shorter varieties to grow in containers. You can plant bulbs in early spring.
To keep chipmunks, squirrels, and other rodents from disturbing your bulbs, bury a section of chicken wire just below the soil line and top with mulch.


Petal power
Growing lilies is as simple as providing a rich, well-draining spot in full or partial sun; choosing a planting depth that’s appropriate for your bulb size; following the right fertilizing and watering schedules; and fending off insect and animal pests. So, whether you’ve purchased a variety of different lily bulbs or you’ve scored some live plant divisions from a friend, you should be able to coax truly jaw-dropping blooms out of your lilies for years to come.

I enjoy discovering different ingredients to use in my cooking, especially ingredients I can grow myself. Cuban oregano is one of those interesting flavors. A potent and versatile herb, Cuban oregano is known around the world by several different common names. Depending on your locale, you may have heard it called “soup mint,” Mexican mint, Spanish thyme, or Indian borage.


However, Cuban oregano doesn’t hail from Cuba. In fact, it isn’t technically an oregano at all. Thought to have come from parts of southern and eastern Africa, this useful plant was picked up and transported throughout India and southeast Asia, including island nations like Indonesia, the Philippines, and beyond. These days, it grows as a perennial throughout many tropical areas.

closeup of Cuban oregano leaves
Cuban oregano leaves resemble other mint family (Lamiaceae) members, including lemon balm.
The Cuban oregano plant is very easy to grow in garden beds and works well alongside basil, rosemary, lavender, and other herbs. It also can thrive in outdoor containers and indoors as houseplants.


What is Cuban oregano?
Cuban oregano is also known as Coleus amboinicus and Plectranthus amboinicus. Part of the Lamiaceae family, it is also often confused with what is commonly referred to as the Vicks plant because of its scent. Vicks is actually Plectranthus hadiensis var. Tomentosus and sometimes referred to as Plectranthus tomentosa. My neighbor once gave me a cutting of the Vicks plant and the differences are evident in the foliage.

While both plants are fuzzy, Cuban oregano has leaves that are more lemon balm or mint-like. The leaves of a Vicks plant are more rounded.

Vicks plant, often confused with Cuban oregano
The Vicks plant, shown here, is often mistaken for Coleus amboinicus. However it’s easy to tell the difference by comparing the leaves. The former has more rounded, scalloped leaves, while the latter has a more serrated leaf that looks like mint.
Grown more for its pleasing foliage than its blooms, tiny white or sometimes lavender flowers along tall flower spikes may appear. (However, depending on the length of your particular growing season, your plants might not have enough time to flower before cold weather sets in.)

How does Cuban oregano differ from other oreganos?
While true oregano and Cuban oregano are both included in the mint family, these plants actually look quite different from one another. Common oregano (Origanum vulgare) and its subspecies relatives like Greek oregano, have comparatively small leaves with smooth margins. Meanwhile, Cuban oregano has larger, fuzzy leaves with toothed edges. And the stems are much thicker and hairier, relative to those of common oregano.

In terms of flavor, common oregano and its many subspecies can vary widely but are generally sharper than Cuban oregano. Sometimes used to balance the heat of especially spicy dishes, it has a slightly sweet, camphor-like taste with hints of mint and oregano.

The best conditions growing conditions
In tropical climates, Cuban oregano is grown as a flowering perennial. In the U.S., it is hardy to zones 9 or 10 through 11. A plant can flourish in either partial sun or full sun, but, as a general rule, it needs at least four to six hours of sunlight daily. Rather than letting this plant scorch under the harshest, midday rays, it’s best to locate it in a spot that will get the gentler morning or evening hours of direct sunlight. As for the great indoors, these plants can do well in pots placed on or near a sunny windowsill.


potted cuban oregano
If you plan to keep Cuban oregano in a pot, be sure to use one with plenty of drainage holes and choose a lightweight potting mix suitable for tropical plants.
Like its succulent relatives, Cuban oregano prefers dry conditions, as well as soil that is loose, well-draining, and rich in organic matter.

Growing Cuban oregano from seed
Live plants may be hard to come by at your local nursery. However you may be able to find Cuban oregano seeds online. Remember, it’s is a tropical plant, so, in its natural environment, the soil is warm. For your seeds to start successfully you’ll need to maintain a temperature of at least 70°F (21°C) in your growing medium. Using a seedling heat mat is can help with germination.

For the best results, choose a very lightweight, well-draining growing medium like an organic cactus mix. Moisten the potting mix thoroughly, allow the excess water to drain out, and then sprinkle your seeds on the soil’s surface. Gently press the seeds into place and then lightly mist them. Place your seed-starting tray or container on top of the seedling heat mat and periodically mist the soil’s surface. Your seeds should germinate in about two to three weeks.

Growing Cuban oregano from cuttings
Growing Cuban oregano from stem cuttings is quick and very easy. To start:

Snip a few of the healthiest-looking stems from an established plant. Each stem cutting should be about two to three inches long and needs to include three or four leaf nodes. (A leaf node is the part of the stem from which true leaves emerge. When buried under soil, roots can also grow from these nodes.)
Carefully strip off the bottom one or two sets of leaves, leaving at least one set of true leaves at the top of the stem intact. (If you like, you may choose to apply rooting hormone to these newly exposed node areas, but this step is optional.)
Slide each stem into a container of moistened growing medium. Gently press the stem cutting into place so that the soil makes good contact with the buried stem portion. Keep the soil moist but not waterlogged.
If you have a seedling heat mat, slide it underneath the planted cuttings. This speeds the rooting process overall. It also can help to reduce the likelihood that you’ll lose your stem cuttings to damping-off disease.

One clue that your cuttings have established some roots? You’ll notice new growth forming along the stems. Watch for two to three new sets of leaves along each stem before transplanting rooted cuttings into the garden or a new pot.

Coleus amboinicus
Cuban oregano is also known as Coleus amboinicus and Plectranthus amboinicus.
Growing Cuban oregano from transplants
If you already have access to a stand of well-established Cuban oregano plants growing in an outdoor garden bed or even in a large pot, you’re in luck. Under the right conditions, it spreads easily—particularly when its stems grow long enough to droop against the soil.

A single long stem making good contact with moist soil can generate new plants at each leaf node. So, if you gently dig around the perimeter of your Cuban oregano, you may find several of these young “volunteer” plants. Although they start out as sets of leaves growing along a parent plant’s lengthy bit of stem, in time they can develop their own sets of roots. You can use scissors to separate small, rooting volunteer plants from one another and then plant them elsewhere in the garden or in a new pot.

Caring for your plants
As long as you follow a few basic instructions, Cuban oregano is an easy-going garden guest.

Watering: If your plants’ roots become waterlogged, you might notice its leaves begin to yellow and die back, and, if wet conditions persist long-term, Cuban oregano can succumb to damping off. With that in mind, when watering a potted plant, keep excess water off its leaves by bottom watering. When watering plants in a garden bed or very large container, direct the spout of your hose or watering can at the soil level and try to avoid splashing water directly onto the plant leaves.
Feeding: Cuban oregano is not a heavy feeder and as long as your garden or potting soil includes some nutrient-rich, organic matter like aged compost, you shouldn’t need to add fertilizer. If you do wish to boost your soil fertility, opt for an all-natural, slow-release fertilizer.
Pest control: When in bloom, Cuban oregano’s tiny flowers can attract pollinators. Otherwise, this plant seldom draws the attention of insect pests. If grown indoors as a houseplant, it is possible for it to attract spider mites. You can manage large infestations with neem oil.
Can you overwinter Cuban oregano plants?
Provided your low temperatures don’t fall below 40 degrees, you might be able to treat Cuban oregano as a frost-tender perennial zones 9 or 10 through 11. Otherwise, you’ll need to take action in late winter so that you can grow it out in your garden again next season.

While you can place garden plants in containers to overwinter indoors, starting new plants from cuttings or transplanting volunteer plants may be less cumbersome. Take stem cuttings or pot up new volunteer Cuban oregano plants at about the same time that you might start cold-weather veggies for your fall garden. Nurture these indoors over the winter and you’ll have healthy new plants to set out when the warm weather returns.

Harvesting Cuban oregano
To harvest Cuban oregano, just pinch off a few healthy leaves. If you need larger quantities of the herb, you should be able to snip off two to three inches of stem length from mature plants without damaging them. (In fact, doing so can encourage more compact, bushy growth overall.)

Tips for cooking and using Cuban oregano
Cuban oregano makes a versatile and unique addition in the kitchen and the kitchen garden. With good reason it has found its way into kitchens around the world. The herb is robust enough to hold its own with meats, including poultry, beef, and lamb for which it’s a staple in some marinade and stuffing recipes. It’s also used to make jerk seasoning and adds flavor to soups and stews.

Other culinary herbs to grow
Lemongrass
Sage
Rosemary
Cilantro
Basil
Parsley

In late winter and early spring, as our green thumbs are itching to get back in the garden, there are a few tasks that can be accomplished as we wait for warmer temperatures. Knowing when to cut back roses is one of those to-dos that fits within this pre-gardening season timeframe. I will say that a lot of roses, especially the newer varieties, are pretty low maintenance and don’t require a ton of care. If you are buying a small plant, it will take some time to become established, so you don’t necessarily have to touch it for the first couple of years or so.


An At Last rose in a garden
In my current home, I was hesitant to allow any roses into my garden (because of the wildly unkempt roses I mention below), but I was swayed by At Last, a hardy, low-maintenance, long-blooming beauty with peach blooms. This rose requires minimal pruning. Even deadheading isn’t really necessary as it reblooms all summer long.

However, once your rose becomes more established in the garden, pruning will promote a healthy growth habit. It will also maintain the rose plant at the size you’d like it to be.

Some benefits of cutting back roses
Besides improving and maintaining the shape of your plant, pruning rose stems, or canes as they’re called, offers other benefits:

Cutting out dead or diseased branches helps prevent the spread of disease.
It provides airflow and sunlight around the canes, which encourages healthy growth.
Pruning can encourage new growth and more blooms throughout the growing season.
Cutting back roses can maintain the shrub’s shape in the garden and prevent it from growing into other plants.
Certain types of roses, like traditional English shrub roses can become leggy if left unpruned.
a David Austin rose
Pruning roses can encourage healthy growth and more blooms. Be sure to get rid of dead or diseased wood. This is a variety from David Austin Roses that was on display at the Chelsea Flower Show.
What you’ll need to prune a rose

Before you head outside, I highly recommend investing in a pair of rose gloves. These are thick gardening gloves, usually made of leather or suede or another heavy material, that have gauntlets covering your forearms and wrists. I discovered this wonderful glove invention out of necessity. The garden of my first home featured two huge old garden roses with thick canes and enormous thorns. I had a couple of run-ins before I was gifted a pair of rose gloves that protect your skin from the wrath of rose thorns. You may also want to wear long sleeves when pruning for a little extra arm protection.

rose gloves
Rose gloves are made with a thick material to protect your hands and arms from thorns. They also offer protection for other gardening tasks, and from other plants, like thistles.
You will also need your pruning implement of choice, such as bypass pruners. I have some heavy-duty hand pruners that work just fine with the size of my shrub. Loppers, which are similar to pruners, but with longer handles, can give you the grip and leverage needed to cut into heavier canes. They can also offer a bit of distance between your body and all the canes.

Make sure the blades of your pruners are sharp so you can make clean cuts, and clean (in the other sense) to avoid the spread of disease among other trees and shrubs in your yard.

When to cut back roses
The time of year to cut back roses is early spring, as the buds begin to emerge along the canes. At this point your rose is waking up from its winter dormancy. However, don’t be too eager. Avoid pruning too early in case the weather really takes a turn. A lot of rose publications will mention pruning when you see forsythia shrubs in bloom. This is usually around March, or April (or late February or May in some growing zones), depending on where you live and the type of spring it’s been.


a rose bud on a cane in early spring
When you see buds on your roses, you’ll know they’re starting to break dormancy. Later winter and early spring is the best time to prune. If you’re cutting back your rose, you can prune by up to a third of its current size. Cuts can be made above a bud that’s facing outwards, as shown.
Rambling roses, or ramblers, as they’re often called, are an exception in that the flowers form on old wood from the previous year’s growth. So for those varieties, it’s best to wait until after they’ve flowered to avoid cutting off this year’s blooms.

How to prune a rose
Years ago, I remember a friend, whose mom grew a lot of roses, drew me a diagram of where to make a cut and how. That advice was to prune your stem at about a 45-degree angle above an outward facing bud or bud eye, with the higher end being the one with the bud. But that has been addressed as a garden myth. Various rose societies and companies all maintain that you can cut on the angle or straight across. Neither will affect the health of the rose.

The main point to be made here is that you want the rose canes to grow outwards, not inwards, helping maintain good air circulation throughout the whole plant.

a rose bush in early spring
Even from a distance, you can see a blend of old and new wood on this rose, as well as those small bud eyes that start to appear on the new shoots as spring approaches. Be mindful that a late frost could cause some cold damage. That’s why learning when to cut back roses is important.
Begin by taking out any old wood right to ground level. I’ve found dead canes will sometimes snap right off with little effort. I use my pruners like tongs or tweezers to pick up the canes and deposit them in a yard bag or my garden trug.

Then, look for any errant branches that are pointing in a weird direction, like sideways or downwards, or that are touching other branches. You want the plant to fan upwards and outwards.

pruning rose canes
When removing dead or diseased wood, prune it right down to the base of where it meets the plant or to the ground. Use pruning shears or long-handled loppers, depending on the thickness of the canes.
How much can you prune back?
You can prune back a rose by one third of its total height. This encourages a fuller plant as well as more leaf and bloom growth. If you worry you’ve cut back too much, don’t worry. In this case, roses are pretty resilient and forgiving. In other cases (pests and disease), they can be a little less resilient.

Be sure to clean up around the base of the plant. Remove old leaves and pieces of dead canes. Dispose of your canes in a yard bag and not a compost pile to prevent spreading disease.

When spring is springing, I want to celebrate it both indoors and out. Every new bud and bloom is exciting,o and spring blooms are brought inside as decoration. Forced forsythia branches are added to vases with freshly cut tulips, at least one primula is potted up to brighten a room, and pansies are brought into the kitchen to decorate spring dishes. It’s fun to add fresh, edible blooms to salads and baking. They add a wow factor to the plate. If you’ve ever been wondering, are pansies edible, well, you are in luck. Because I love to include flowers in a variety of recipes (it’s basically edible crafting), I thought I’d share some different ways to enjoy pansies.


I enjoy adding a variety of flowers as decoration to different dishes, like nasturtium flowers to a salad and violets to a cake. I also preserve various herb flowers like chives and garlic chives in vinegar, and I dry chamomile for tea. For this article, I’m just focusing on pansies and violas with their sweet, colorful faces. The petals on their own are quite lovely or you can toss in the whole flower to whatever you’re making.

pansy flower
All parts of a pansy flower are edible and while they don’t really taste like much, they look so pretty when they’re used as a garnish for sweet and savory dishes.
Do make sure that your flowers haven’t been sprayed with chemical pesticides before consuming them. I often grow pansies from seed, so I know exactly what’s been added to their pots. Be careful when purchasing flowers from nurseries, garden centers, or a florist. You may want to ask to confirm they’ve been grown organically.


strawflowers on a cake
Some flowers are simply for show, like these strawflowers that I saved from my summer garden and used to decorate my holiday yule log. Always be sure about whether a flower is edible before bringing it to the table.
Are pansies edible? And what do they taste like?
Pansies have a pretty mild flavor and scent. In fact I would say they’re mostly included in recipes for their looks. The flavor is not on par with say a rose or elderflower. It’s a bit more grassy and bland. After candying some pansies, despite the sugary coating, my niece said they tasted kind of like a black tea. I agreed they had a faint hint of that flavor.

At the very least, if you’re not interested in eating them, you can still include edible flowers as a garnish. Arrange pansies atop baked goods, among appetizers, on thick soups, on cakes, etc.

pansies in an outdoor pot
When I plant pansies in my spring urn arrangement, I leave some blooms on display and snip others to add to spring recipes—usually baking.
Using pansies in the kitchen

Just adding pansy flowers to a dish can elevate them to gourmet status aesthetically. Think about which flowers might be in season when you’re planning your menu. Because of their mild flavor, they can be added to both savory dishes and desserts.

Here are a few ways to use fresh pansy flowers:

Press them into soft cheeses
Use them to garnish devilled eggs
Bake them into tea biscuits
Process them into jellies
Make candied pansies (instructions below)
Freeze them into ice cubes with other edible flowers
Add to the top of a salad before tossing
Press into shortbread cookies (Martha Stewart has a pansy cookie recipe)
Add tricolor violas to sheets of pasta
pansy flowers in a salad
Even if you don’t want to eat them, pansies can be added as a garnish to a dish (and are easily picked out. Add a little salad dressing and they will just blend in with the rest of the salad’s flavors!
What you need to candy pansy flowers
I was first inspired to make candied pansies after editing an article several years ago by Charmian Christie, aka The Messy Baker. It’s pretty easy to do. All you need are egg whites (you may want to use pasteurized egg whites for food safety reasons), superfine sugar and water. Simply separate one egg from its yolk (one egg white goes a long way) or use the equivalent in tablespoons from a carton of egg whites, and whisk the mixture well with about a teaspoon of water. Lay out the clean, dry flowers on a cooling rack that has a grid. I find the flowers sit nicely in the squares.


adding an egg wash to pansies
To candy pansies and other edible flowers, use a brush to add an egg wash to the fronts and backs of the flowers. Sprinkle with superfine sugar and allow to dry for at least 24 hours.
Candying pansies
Lay out a piece of parchment paper underneath the rack to catch any drips. Using a small paint brush and tweezers, gently “paint” your egg mixture onto both sides of the flower. I’ve found that a silicone basting brush also works. And in the absence of tweezers, you could simply use a fingertip. Sprinkle your sugar onto each bloom, coating each petal. Allow the flower to dry out overnight at room temperature. It takes about 24 to 36 hours.

To hasten the drying, you can put your oven-safe drying rack in an oven pre-heated to about 150°F to 170°F with the door kept slightly open for a few hours. Keep an eye on them to make sure they don’t get too crispy. I’ve found the flowers don’t crisp up as much when they’ve been left out on the counter. That’s the best option if you have the time.

candied pansy on a lemon square
To me both lemon squares and pansies spell spring, so why not combine them in one dessert? Now clearly I’m not a food stylist, because the lemon squares I made here were very hard to cleanly slice. However, I loved the look of this dried, candied flower.
Once they’re dry, the flowers may stick to the rack, so be extra gentle when removing them. You may want to slide a butter knife gently underneath to detach. I’ve broken a few by being a bit overzealous with removing the flowers and forgetting how delicate they are once candied.

Your candied flowers will be good for several weeks if you store them in an airtight container. Add them to cakes and cupcakes, on a tray of squares and other desserts, or as a garnish in a bowl of ice cream.

Wrapping pansies into rice paper rolls
In the new book, The Edible Flower, authors Erin Bunting and Jo Facer include a recipe for Vietnamese summer rolls with viola flowers. I love making cold rice paper rolls as an appetizer. Mine usually include freshly cooked vermicelli, julienned slices of cucumber and carrot (sometimes pickled in rice vinegar, sugar and water), and herbs. You can also include a protein, like tofu or cooked chicken or shrimp. It’s usually a few leaves from a thai basil or mint plant that are seen once the roll has been wrapped and turned over. But flowers add a whole other wow factor.

Once I started including edible flowers in the odd dish or baked good, I’m now constantly thinking of how I can incorporate other blooms into something delicious—or at least pretty.

My introductions to new plants come from an array of sources—trial garden visits, emails from growers and colleagues, gardening presentations, garden catalogs, etc. Sometimes, the plants themselves (or seeds) arrive on my doorstep to trial. The seeds will be started under grow lights in spring or direct-sown in the garden. The annuals and perennial plants I dig into gardens or arrange in pots. Then, I watch them closely to see how they perform in my growing zone and take a lot of pictures to share with fellow green thumbs. I love to share my experiences with new favorites, as well as plants that are on my ever-expanding “must-grow” list.



Back in 2017, I got a behind-the-scenes look at how growers come up with new plant introductions, while attending the California Spring Trials with the National Garden Bureau. That trip gave me an extra sense of appreciation for the work that goes into plant breeding. This article is where I discuss the eye-catching new plants that cross my radar each year.

New plants for 2023
Echinacea Artisan Yellow Ombre
I grow a lot of echinacea plants on my property. I have a rainbow of blooms, from pink and red to yellow and orange. This one was a standout in my dry front yard perennial garden. It’s an All-America Selections regional winner that is low maintenance and hardy down to -30 °F (-34.4 °C). The plants attract pollinators throughout the growing season, and when they start to dry out, also provide great fall and winter interest.

Echinacea Artisan™ Yellow Ombre
Echinacea Artisan™ Yellow Ombre did well in my low-maintenance front yard garden.

Yukon Sun rose
I’ve written about some of the modern roses that have been bred to have greater pest and disease resistance, as well as being quite hardy in cold climates. In 2023, Vineland Research and Innovation Centre, is introducing its latest addition to the 49th Parallel Collection: Yukon Sun. This gorgeous rosebush with yellow blooms is compact, growing about one meter high (39 inches) by one meter wide. It is hardy down to -31°F (-35°C).

Yukon Sun from 49th Parallel Roses
It may have a delicate bloom, but Yukon Sun roses sit atop hardy plants that are pest and disease resistant. Photo courtesy of J.C. Bakker Nurseries
Leucanthemum Carpet Angel
I tend to gravitate towards frilly and flouncy things. This extends to flowers, with Leucanthemum Carpet Angel being a clear must-have. This 2023 All-America Selections Perennial winner that is hardy down to -30 °F (-34.4 °C) is the first groundcover shasta daisy. It will spread up to 20 inches (51 cm) wide and bloom all season long.

Leucanthemum Carpet Angel
Leucanthemum Carpet Angel is short in stature, which makes it perfect as a groundcover plant. Photo courtesy of All-America Selections

Sun Dipper tomato
Since I also get to trial veggies, I couldn’t help but include this indeterminate tomato to my plant list. One Sun Dipper plant gave me an abundance of its savory small tomatoes. I was harvesting well into October. It’s hard to describe the shape. These tomatoes are a bit oblong and narrower at the top. The plant is also resistant to some tomato plant diseases.

Little Dipper tomatoes
Little Dipper tomatoes were incredibly prolific in my front yard raised bed.
Dragon Wing White Begonia
If there was a standout in my container gardens this year, it was this Dragon Wing White Begonia. Niki had high praise for it, too: “Begonia Dragon Wing White was a standout on my partly shaded deck. I tucked a single plant in a 12-inch diameter pot and by mid-summer, it had filled the container and was about 15 inches tall and wide.” This is definitely an annual worth growing in pots or hanging baskets.

Begonia Dragon Wing White
Niki’s Dragon Wing White Begonia was a stunner on her deck last summer. It ranks high on both our lists for new plants for 2023.
Cracker Jack Hybrid Organic Watermelon
I get both seeds and seedlings from William Dam Seeds, my local go-to. I love to see what’s new in their catalog each winter. This seedless watermelon, Cracker Jack Hybrid, is early to mature, which is great if you live somewhere with a shorter growing season.

Cracker Jack watermelon
On my must-try list, I hope to start this Cracker Jack hybrid organic watermelon from seed. Photo courtesy of William Dam Seeds
‘Dark Side of the Moon’ Astilbe hybrid
Astilbe, aka false goat’s beard feature fluffy, feathery flowers that attract bees. ‘Dark Side of the Moon’ features rich, chocolate foliage with elegant pink and burgundy flowers. Plant it in a garden with consistently moist soil that gets about six hours of filtered sun in a day.

'Dark Side of the Moon' astilbe
I can see the pretty pink and burgundy adding some lovely texture to a summer cut flower arrangement. Photo courtesy of Proven Winners
Ruby Ruffle Patio Peach
I was reading about some new roses and a hydrangea from Star Roses & Plants when I spotted this intriguing, compact, ornamental peach tree. Ruby Ruffle grows clusters of vibrant pink blooms in spring before developing long, slender and slightly ruffled foliage throughout the rest of the growing season.

Ruby Ruffle Patio Peach Tree
I’m so intrigued by the vibrant spring blooms on this interesting compact mini tree. Photo courtesy of Star Roses & Plants
New plants for 2022
Spanish lavender (Lavandula stoechas) Primavera
I think this was my favorite new plant plant that I trialled for 2022, probably because I planted it in my new favorite terracotta pot. I loved the flouncy blooms, or “flags” as they’re called, that wave above the flowers of ‘Primavera’ from Darwin Perennials. The foliage still looked healthy, and there were still a few flowers when I went to overwinter the pot in late fall (it’s an annual here, because it’s only hardy down to USDA zone 7). The blooms attract bees and butterflies, and the plant loved its sunny spot on my front porch area.

Primavera lavendula in a pot
‘Primavera’ lavandula, a variety of Spanish lavender, thrived in a fancy terracotta pot.
Leucanthemum ‘White Lion’
This perennial beauty is called “the spring Shasta” on the grower’s website. Which means White Lion is a long-blooming, three-season perennial that will start its show in late spring. A new introduction from Kieft Seed, my two shasta daisy plants bloomed through the end of October in my front yard garden. Happy in full sun, it is hardy down to USDA zone 3b and extremely drought tolerant.

White Lion shasta daisy
It looks like something munched on a couple of petals, but I wanted to show this photo of my White Lion shasta daisy because it was taken October 28. Both my plants were still blooming in my perennial garden.
Cosmos ‘Apricotta’
I grow some type of Cosmos every year from seed (and sometimes I’m lucky to get volunteer seedlings coming up the following year). ‘Apricotta’, with its lush, pink flowers with hints of apricot and yellow are on my must-grow list. A new variety from William Dam Seeds, they will bloom through the first frost.

Cosmos 'Apricotta' 
Cosmos ‘Apricotta’ showing off its flouncy blooms in a vase. Photo courtesy of Connie Bijl of William Dam Seeds
‘Frill Ride’ Bigleaf Hydrangea
I can never resist a ruffle or a frill, so out of all the new hydrangeas Bloomin’ Easy is releasing for 2022, I couldn’t resist ‘Frill Ride’. This big-leaf hydrangea features enormous deep-pink, frilly flowers. I imagine they’d look pretty stunning in a dried arrangement, too. This shrub is hardy down to zone 5 and prefers part sun (three to four hours a day of sun in the morning, with filtered sun the rest of the day). It grows to be about two to three feet tall and equally wide.

Here are some other gorgeous Bloomin’ Easy hydrangeas that Jessica wrote about, including the award-winning Kimono.

'Frill Ride' bigleaf hydrangea from Bloomin' Easy
Forget about containers… ‘Frill Ride’ is a lush, gorgeous bigleaf hydrangea that would be a “thriller” in any garden. Photo courtesy of Bloomin’ Easy
Easy Wave Sky Blue Spreading Petunia
Depending on the light, and I suppose, the plant (because sometimes certain growing conditions can affect the blooms), the Easy Wave Sky Blue petunia looks a lot like Very Peri, the Pantone Color of the Year. What I liked this plant was its contrast and slightly unusual blue-ish hue in a couple of my containers. The plants bloomed throughout the hot summer and into fall. They also spread nicely in a garden.

Easy Wave Sky Blue petunia
An Easy Wave Sky Blue petunia bloom in one of my containers. I paired it with mojito mint, which provided a vibrant contrast against the blue-ish mauve hues of the flowers.
Suncredible Saturn Sunflower
This bright, cheerful Helianthus hybrid is everblooming, meaning season-long blooms. Part of the new Proven Winners lineup, the website suggests planting these as a living screen or along a fence. Plants reach up to three feet in height. Plants aren’t super fussy—they like rich soils, but will grow in poorer soils. These drought-tolerant beauties also make great cut flowers and attract bees and butterflies.

Suncredible Saturn sunflower
The bright, sunny faces of Suncredible Saturn sunflowers will brighten up the garden and summer flower arrangements. Photo courtesy of Proven Winners
Zinnia Profusion Red Yellow Bicolor
My love of zinnias is well documented, and this All-America Selections Winner for 2021 (and Fleuroselect Gold Medal award winner) was a winner in my garden, too. Profusion Red Yellow Bicolor technically counts as new as some seed catalogs are just starting to showcase it for 2022! The plant lived up to the “profusion” series part of its name because of the multiple blooms. It thrived in both my raised beds and my hot, dry front yard garden. Plants are a fairly compact size, with a mounding habit that supports lots of flowers. The details in the petals look hand drawn.

Zinnia Profusion Red Yellow Bicolor 
Zinnia Profusion Red Yellow Bicolor was an absolute standout in my garden this summer.
New plants for 2021
Aurora Borealis rose
I love the advances that have been made in rose breeding over the last several years to create hardy roses that have greater pest and disease resistance. This new kid on the block, from Vineland’s 49th Parallel Collection was developed really close to my home, too. I feel a certain pride when I tell people about this compact shrub. Aurora Borealis is the third rose in this collection.

Aurora Borealis rose from the 49th Parallel Collection
Aurora Borealils is black spot resistant, and grows one metre tall by one metre wide. Photo courtesy of Vineland Research and Innovation Centre
The Velvet Fog Smokebush
I have a thing for texture, so the fluffy, soft-looking plumes of smokebushes always catch my eye. This one is pretty spectacular and apparently grows more flowers than a conventional smokebush. Clouds of pinky-red seem to hover atop the blue-green foliage of this showy shrub. Mature plants range from 60 to 96 inches (152 to 244 cm) tall and should be planted in part sun to full sun.

The Velvet Fog
The Velvet Fog, which sounds like a British 90s band name—or a fancy drink at Starbucks—is hardy down to USDA zone 5a. Photo courtesy of Proven Winners
Aquilegia Earlybird
I don’t think I’ve even seen such a profusion of blooms all together in a columbine plant, in such a short little tidy clump. And you can see their faces! The blooms are so stunning, on all three from this series: Purple Yellow, Blue White, and Red Yellow. These plants are hardy down to zone 3a!


Plant Aquilegia Earlybird (this is Red Yellow) in full sun. In my experience, Columbine will tolerate a variety of soils. Photo courtesy of Kieft Seed
Midnight Cascade blueberry
Why do I have a blueberry bush in an article about new ornamentals? Well I’ve always found Bushel and Berry’ berries to be both edible AND ornamental. And this is the first-ever hanging basket blueberry! The flowers in spring are white and shaped like bells—they remind me of lily-of-the-valley—and the hints of red in the leaves deepen towards the fall.

Midnight Cascade hanging basket blueberries
Midnight Cascade is hardy down to USDA zone 5. I would nestle it in the garden with some mulch if you leave it in the pot for the winter. Photo courtesy of Bushel and Berry
Echinacea ‘Sweet Sandia’
I’m a sucker for green flowers. ‘Sweet Sandia’ is a pretty groovy-looking flower introduction with both green AND pink petals. They’re described on Terra Nova Nurseries’ website as “a slice of watermelon.” Hardy down to USDA zone 4, these pollinator magnets bloom from July through October.

Echinacea 'Sweet Sandia'
I think I need to add ‘Sweet Sandia’ to my collection of echinacea. Photo courtesy of Terra Nova Nurseries, Inc.
Lilac New Age™ White
Lilac is my favorite scent of spring. So I’d be all over adding another lilac bush to my property. I love how delicate the blossoms are on this white lilac. It is compact, resistant to mildew (a huge bonus, because by mid-summer, the bottom leaves on mine usually have it) and is hardy down to USDA zone 4.

New Age White lilac
I can picture (and smell) these in a vase. To me, lilacs = spring. Photo courtesy of Star Roses & Plants
Phlox Super Ka-Pow™ White
Another white choice, but I was quite taken with the soft, delicate white petals with a hint of pink in the centers of this new phlox. The petals may look dainty, but this is one tough plant that is frost tolerant—and hardy down to USDA zone 4b—rabbit and deer resistant, resistant to powdery mildew, and best of all, low maintenance. It also attracts bees and butterflies.

Phlox Super Ka Pow White
This Phlox paniculata (Super Ka-Pow White) will also bloom throughout the summer months and look super pretty in a bouquet. Photo courtesy of Darwin Perennials
Petunia Headliner Crystal Sky
Growing up, I think my mom had something like five standard colors of petunias to choose from for her gardens—purple, white, pink, etc. But the options now are pretty fun. I think plant breeders enjoy trying to outdo each other each year. When I went to the California Spring Trials, I was amazed at the breadth of petunia varieties on display. But that’s where I developed a new appreciation for this popular annual. The possibilities are endless!

Petunia Headliner Crystal Sky
The blooms on Headliner Crystal Sky remind me a bit of Starry Night—they’ve got those bleached out tie-dye spots, but also feature beautiful veining right into the center.
Photo courtesy of Selecta One
High Noon® Bush Daisy
When I’m choosing annuals for my patio containers or to fill holes in my garden beds, I’m looking for plants with that “wow” factor. A conversation starter. This is one of those plants that immediately draws you in. It’s a thriller. And despite the monochromatic yellow hue, the entire flower is interesting.

Euryops High Noon
Euryops ‘High Noon’ are heat- and drought-tolerant plants that will thrive in full sun to part sun, attracting bees and butterflies throughout its long blooming season. Photo courtesy of Proven Winners
Calibrachoa Cha-Cha™ Diva Hot Pink
Calibrachoas consistently make it into my container arrangements each year. There are so many varieties, but I love the ones that look like a teeny tiny paint brush was used to design each petal. The blooms of sun lover Cha-Cha will cascade over your pots as a bloom-filled spiller, showing off right until those first frosts.

Calibrachoa Cha Cha Diva Hot Pink
This is Calibrachoa Cha-Cha Diva Hot Pink also comes in shades of blue, yellow, and orange. Photo courtesy of Ball FloraPlant
Foliage Celosia Sol™ Collection Gekko Green
I’m always on the hunt for interesting foliage for my container arrangements. I’ve grown celosia with the fuzzy-looking flowers, but this new variety is a foliage celosia that’s meant to stand on its own. The leaves, which are arranged in clusters that look like flowers, are green and burgundy. They would make a filler in my pots!

Celosia Sol Gekko Green
Celosia Sol Gekko Green loves the sun and shouldn’t have any downy mildew issues.
Photo courtesy of PanAmerican Seed
New plants for 2020
Superbells Blackcurrant Punch and Double Blue Calibrachoa
Calibrachoas are container plant regulars in my garden, probably because every year yields an interesting new collection of varieties. They make great spillers in both hanging baskets and containers and bloom all season long (without having to deadhead). Often a calibrachoa will determine the color combination of my arrangements. There were two superstars in my garden: Superbells Blackcurrant Punch and Superbells Double Blue, which Proven Winners sent to me to trial.

Blackcurrant Punch is a gorgeous fuchsia hue with a black and yellow center. The black part looks like it was painted on by a leaky felt-tipped pen.

Superbells Blackcurrant Punch is one of the hot new plants for 2020
Superbells Blackcurrant Punch is gorgeous and the whole plant absolutely popped planted beside a lime green coleus.
Double Blue was planted in my main urn along with alyssum and a selection of herbs, like trailing rosemary and parsley. It paired nicely with a deep purple salvia, and the purple and mauve Superbena Sparkling Amethyst Improved Verbena.

Superbells Double Blue is more of a purple hue with ruffled petals.
Superbells Double Blue is more of a purple hue with ruffled petals.
Wave Carmine Velour Spreading Petunia
I grew this lovely petunia from seed in 2019 and it bloomed through the fall. The color is a vibrant red, but it’s the delicate center pattern that is really stunning when you look at it closely. Part of the Wave family, it’s a 2019 All-America Selections Winner.

Wave Carmine Velour Spreading Petunia made the list of new annuals for 2020
My Wave Carmine Velour Spreading Petunias were grown in a container, but trial judges said they worked well as a groundcover, too.
Marigold ‘Dropshot’
I’m fortunate to live near William Dam Seeds, so it’s fun to get a sneak peek of new varieties in their trial gardens. On a tour with flower and herb seed manager Connie Bijl, we headed over to an herb garden where she pointed out ‘Dropshot’ and encouraged the group to taste it. The plant had a licorice flavour that can be used as a tarragon substitute. While you might expect it has flowers, it is all about the feathery foliage.

Marigold Dropshot is an interesting new plant because it is both edible and ornamental 
In the trial garden I visited, Marigold Dropshot had a nice round habit, which would provide a really nice backdrop to showcase a showier ornamental bloom of a similar height.
Coleus Main Street Beale Street
I usually pick up at least one variety of coleus on my yearly garden center travels. Main Street Beale Street is a 2020 AAS Ornamental Winner, the first-ever coleus to win the honour. Apparently the foliage doesn’t fade over the summer and it’s supposed to thrive in full sun and full shade.

Coleus Main Street Beale Street has striking red foliage that won't fade throughout the summer.
Not sure why it has two street names in its name (maybe it’s an intersection?), but Main Street Beale Street is a standout annual for 2020. Image courtesy of All-America Selections
UpTown Frosted Strawberry Zinnia
Zinnias are another garden staple that are super-easy to grow from seed. This pink ombré variety is heat tolerant and has excellent disease resistance. Zinnias are pollinator magnets—bees and butterflies love them, and I’ve even seen hummingbirds on the zinnias in my garden. Once they take off, they usually bloom right through the fall. Zinnias also make great cut flowers.

UpTown Frosted Strawberry Zinnia is a new plant and a pollinator magnet
UpTown Frosted Strawberry Zinnia is a new plant and a pollinator magnet. Image courtesy of Burpee Home Gardens
Bright Lights Berry Rose Osteospermum
Speaking of pink, I really loved the blooms on Bright Lights Berry Rose. This variety featured a gradient from white to deep pink, with flecks of orange in the center. They really popped against the deep blue of my Muskoka chairs and outdoor carpet. These heat-tolerant stunners also bloomed for me more than once, the last blooms fading at the end of the fall.

Osteospermum Bright Lights Berry Rose is a new favourite of mine and a hot new plant for 2020 gardens
Also called African Daisies, osteospermums come in a rainbow of hues. Bright Lights Berry Rose is a new favorite of mine.
Lavandula Bandera Deep Purple
Generally lavandula comes in light shades of mauve or pink, so this deep purple hue really stands out. I can see it looking great in a light-colored container, paired with lime green foliage. It is long-flowering and self-cleaning (no deadheading required!) and likes the sunshine.

Lavandula Bandera Deep Purple can look interesting on its own in a pot.
Lavandula Bandera Deep Purple can look interesting on its own in a pot. It doesn’t need accompanying thrillers, spillers, and fillers! Image courtesy of PanAmerican Seed
Heuchera NORTHERN EXPOSURE™ Sienna
I’m drawn to standout foliage, so I have a few heucheras throughout my gardens. I love using them in container arrangements and then they’ll eventually make their way into the garden. This one is hardy all the way down to zone 3 and heat tolerant. The leaves start out a vibrant light green with subdued red veins in spring, but evolve to a more orange-chartreuse with a deeper pattern over the summer months. The flowers look quite stunning, too.

Heuchera NORTHERN EXPOSURE™ Sienna features stunning foliage, making it a must-have new plant for 2020.
Heuchera NORTHERN EXPOSURE™ Sienna would look pretty stunning as a border plant, but will also fit in nicely to an established perennial garden. Photo courtesy of TERRA NOVA® Nurseries, Inc.
New plants for 2019
Echinacea KISMET Raspberry
I like how echinacea plants bloom as ready-made bouquets in the garden. They grow well in my dry front garden, add interesting bursts of color, and the bees love them. The flowers look interesting in all their stages of growth, even as they die off. I deadhead throughout the season, but those last blooms of fall are left in the garden over the winter, so the birds can eat the seed heads. I have planted a few varieties of this perennial over the years, including Cheyenne Spirit. Echinacea KISMET Raspberry, from TERRA NOVA Nurseries, blooms in full sun from early summer until first frost. Apparently, this variety grows well in a container, too.
Zone: USDA 4-9

KISMET Raspberry Echinacea is a hot new perennial for 2019
Echinacea KISMET Raspberry; photo courtesy of TERRA NOVA® Nurseries, Inc.
Panther Ninebark (Physocarpus opulifolius)
I’ve become a real fan of ninebarks, especially when they bloom. The delicately hued flowers against the deep dark foliage is quite a stunning combo. And it provides a great backdrop for other flowers and foliage, too. This variety from Bloomin’ Easy has sumptuous, black-tinged foliage, loves full sun and has a stronger mildew resistance. This shrub grows between four and five feet tall, and about two to three feet wide.
Zone: USDA 3

The sleek foliage of this Panther ninebark is the reason it landed on our "Hot new plants for 2019" list.
Panther Ninebark; photo courtesy of Blooming’ Easy
Nasturtium Baby Rose
I sow nasturtium seeds every year among the edibles in my raised beds. Nasturtiums are great triple-duty plants: You can eat the flower petals and leaves; the pollinators love them; and they can be planted as a trap crop for aphids (if you don’t mind sacrificing a plant here and there). I guess a fourth bonus is that no matter which variety you choose, nasturtiums have very unique blooms. A few years ago I was delighted to discover Climbing Phoenix, with its serrated petals, rather than the more scalloped ones you’ll find on most other varieties. Baby Rose, which appears to be a similar rosy hue to the echinacea (hey, I have a type!), is a 2019 AAS winner. This compact plant is a great choice for small spaces and containers.

Because of its compact nature, Nasturtium Baby Rose is perfect for small spaces. It also made our "hot new plants for 2019" list!
Nasturtium Baby Rose; photo courtesy of AAS Winners
Chinook Sunrise rose
I love that plant breeders have been working on growing hardy roses for modern gardens. Vineland Research & Innovation Centre in Lincoln, Ontario launched their 49th Parallel Collection with Canadian Shield a few years ago. Chinook Sunrise is black spot tolerant and hardy down to zone 3 (Canada).

Chinook Sunrise rose, a hardy, low-maintenance, black-spot-tolerant rose
Chinook Sunrise from Vineland Research & Innovation Centre’s 49th Parallel collection is a gorgeous pinky-peach modern rose that is hardy down to zone 3 in Canada.
Butterfly Coreopsis Incredible
I love when a seed packet yields more than one color of flower. That’s why I enjoyed the Queeny Lime Orange Zinnias I grew in 2018—no flower looked the same. This new introduction from Renee’s Garden, Butterfly Coreopsis Incredible, features a mix of flowers in soft cream, maroon, yellow, and shades of red. This is a pollinator-friendly plant that is deer resistant and that can withstand hot, dry spells.

New plants for 2019: This Butterfly Coreopsis 'Incredible' is a pollinator magnet.
Butterfly Coreopsis Incredible; photo courtesy of Renee’s Garden
Superbells Doublette Love Swept Double Calibrachoa
Calibrachoas have become container staples on my property. Each season, I choose at least one variety for a pot or hanging basket. These annuals don’t get leggy, they’re heat tolerant and self-cleaning, and they bloom right through the fall. It looks like someone took a paintbrush and carefully painted white around the edges of this new hot pink variety from Proven Winners. I love details like this. These plants are great “spillers” in containers and will also cascade over hanging baskets—and they attract hummingbirds!

Look closely at the detail on the petals of this calibrachoa hybrid, Superbells Doublette Love Swept, from Proven Winners, a hot new plant for 2019
Superbells Doublette Love Swept Double Calibrachoa; photo courtesy of Proven Winners
Dahlia Belle of Barmera
I would be remiss if I didn’t include a plant belonging to one of the National Garden Bureau’s “Year Of” series. 2019 is The Year of the Dahlia, so I included this showy new variety from Longfield Gardens. And since my inbox has been flooded with emails showcasing plants that are coral, the new Pantone color of the year, Belle of Barmera checks that box, too. Plant your tubers in sun to partial sun/light shade and wait for the frilly, ruffled blooms.

Cosmos are among my favorite summer cut flowers. The plants’ light, wispy, foliage, reminiscent of dill, is topped by colorful, daisy-like flowers that sway in the breeze. Popular cottage garden picks, I tend to plant cosmos in my raised beds because they attract bees and butterflies. Growing these semi-hardy annuals from seed is super easy. In this article, I’m going to share some tips on seeding cosmos indoors so you’ll have seedlings for planting season, as well as how to direct-sow seeds right in the garden.



I find cosmos to be one of those plants that don’t look all that great at the garden center. You don’t usually find them in bloom, so unless you recognize that feathery foliage, you may walk right on by. It’s easy to start plants from seed and you’re in control of which varieties you choose.

frilly cosmos flower
Seeding cosmos is easy and allows you to choose from multiple types to add to cottage or vegetable gardens. Not only do they attract beneficial insects, you can harvest them as a cut flower for summer arrangements.
Types of cosmos
Cosmos flowers are native to Mexico, with the range extending into some of the States and into South America. There are about 20 known species to choose from, with a range of varieties. “Cosmos” is the common name and the genus, which makes it easy when you’re looking at seed packets and plant tags.

white 'Dancing Petticoats' cosmos
This cosmos was from Renee’s Gardens’ ‘Dancing Petticoats’ seed mix, which includes a blend of ‘Psyche’, ‘Sea Shells’, and Versailles.

Cosmos bipinnatus is probably the most common species you’ll find growing in the annuals section at garden centers. ‘Picotee’ is a popular C. bipinnatus variety. My favorite seed blend is ‘Dancing Petticoats’ from Renee’s Garden, which includes ‘Sea Shells’, ‘Psyche’, and ‘Versailles’. There is also a yellow and orange species called Cosmos sulphureus, and Chocolate cosmos (Cosmos atrosanguineus), which is a tuberous perennial.

There are also different petal types to choose from. There are tubular, frilly, and flat petals with various shapes.

Seeding cosmos indoors
Order your cosmos seeds when you place your veggie garden seed orders. Cosmos plants aren’t particularly fussy, so if you start them indoors, seedlings can easily be transplanted to the garden. Don’t plant seeds too early, you’ll develop very long, leggy plants. Instead, wait four to five weeks before your last frost date. For me that’s about early April.

In seed trays filled with soilless mix, plant seeds about a quarter of an inch (about a half a centimeter) deep.

Or, you can wait to direct-sow cosmos seeds in the garden, which I explain below.

Cosmos 'Apricotta'
I spotted ‘Apricotta’ in a trial garden and have added it to my seed list!
Planting cosmos seedlings outside

Even though they are hardy annuals, cosmos still need to be hardened off before planting them in the garden. Wait until all danger of frost has passed, then choose a well-draining spot in the garden that gets full sun (a little partial shade is okay, too). It’s worth noting that you don’t have to heavily amend your soil with compost like you do with other flowers and veggies. This may help encourage more blooms. And you don’t really need fertilizers either. Too much nitrogen in the soil will just result in more leaves.

Also, be mindful of the heights that cosmos plants reach. Cosmos bipinnatus can grow to be about three feet (roughly one meter). That means you don’t want them shading out other plants in your garden. And because of the towering heights of cosmos, compared to other plants, they don’t do that well in pots either.

'Picotee' cosmos
If you don’t have room indoors to start cosmos seeds, you can easily direct-sow them in the garden, once all danger of frost has passed.
Seeding cosmos in the garden
For direct-sowing cosmos seeds, follow the advice above for choosing the right location in the garden. Your seed packet is also a wealth of information, explaining the right conditions, depth, mature size, etc. Wait until after your last frost-free date to plant seeds.

Sow seeds a quarter of an inch (about a half a centimeter) deep. You can stagger your planting to play with plant heights and bloom times. Water well until plants are established.

Caring for cosmos plants
Cosmos are pretty low-maintenance plants. Once they get going, they’re quite drought tolerant. If you have a variety that grows too tall, you may find they flop, so staking may be something to consider. Deadhead spent blooms throughout the growing season to encourage more growth. This will also keep plants a bit shorter, encouraging new “branches” to grow outwards. You may even want to prune back some of the stems (up to one third) to keep it more contained.

Even though you need to wait until the soil warms up to grow cosmos from seed, once established the plants may bloom right through the fall. I’ve found some growing among the last tenacious blooms of the growing season. Also, if you allow seed heads to form, cosmos will self-sow in the garden. Keep an eye out for them in the spring!

frilly pink cosmos growing in pea gravel
I’ve allowed cosmos to reseed and and found them grow up through pea gravel the following season, proving they really don’t care all that much about poor soil conditions.
More annuals to grow from seed
Calendula
Climbing nasturtiums
Marigolds
Pansies
Sunflowers
Sweet peas
Zinnias

For those who are new to gardening, figuring out what’s an annual vs perennial plant is an important piece of information to take to the garden center. This knowledge helps determine how you plant up a new garden, or add to an existing plot, and it guides you to container arrangement options. Once you figure out what you need to put where, your seed and plant list will take shape. Where things get tricky is when you get into terms like hardy annual or tender perennial on a plant tag. What do they all mean? This article will share information about both annuals and perennials, and the variations that come with each definition.



How to determine what’s an annual vs perennial
Plant tags are your friend. Pay close attention to what they say to determine whether your plant is an annual or perennial. The tag will also state the best growing conditions in order for your chosen plant to thrive, such as full sun or full shade, dry soil vs wet soil, etc.

a plant tag for a perennial plant
The front and/or back of a plant tag should provide lots of information that you need in order to provide your plant with the best growing conditions.
What is a perennial?
Perennials are plants that come back year after year. They produce new, herbaceous growth on a part of the plant. Some die back in winter, like herbaceous perennials, and survive underground. Trees and shrubs are also considered to be perennials. Perennials (from hostas and asters to meadow grasses and coneflowers) generally last at least three years or more. Hardy perennials will survive extreme winter temperatures at the lower end of the zone map.


eastern prickly pear cactus (Opuntia compressa) 
The Eastern prickly pear cactus (Opuntia compressa) is a native perennial that flourishes in a protected area of my neighbours garden. It is hardy down to -30°F (-34°C)
Speaking of zones, when planting perennials, you want to make sure that they are compatible with your growing zone, meaning the lowest temperature during the winter months in which they will survive. With our evolving climate, it’s easier to go by the average minimum temperature of your region in winter as hardiness zone numbers have been shifting slightly over the years. Empress of Dirt offers a good primer on growing zones in the U.S. and Canada.


I live in a bit of a microclimate that’s protected by an escarpment. so I’m able to push my zones a bit. A local nursery should only be selling plants for your zone, but this is something to be mindful of if you’re ordering online.

What is an annual?
An annual is a plant that lasts for one growing season. This can be confusing, since the word “annual” in other contexts means recurring once each year. And “season” doesn’t always coincide with the traditional seasons of spring, summer, fall, and winter. A seed will germinate, the plant will grow and flower, and then produce seed before dying off. Also referred to as “true annuals,” a lot of bedding and container plants, like zinnias, impatiens, and marigolds, fall under this category.

If a plant you thought was an annual starts to grow in the same space come spring, that could be because those seeds from the previous year fell into the soil. This process is called self-sowing, reseeding, or self-seeding. This has happened in my garden with pansies, sweet alyssum, and cosmos.

self-sown alyssum
I love finding flowers in my garden that have self-sown from plants I grew the previous year. That includes this alyssum that self-seeded in my front yard garden.
Annual sub-categories
Annual plants are further divided into sub-categories. Cool-weather or hardy annuals, which include a mix of vegetables (i.e. peas), herbs (i.e. cilantro), and flowers (pansies), don’t mind early spring frosts.

Half-hardy annuals, such as cosmos, zinnias, and nasturtiums, are a bit sensitive to temperature fluctuations. You still need to keep an eye on them if there is frost in the forecast in the spring.

china asters
China asters are half-hardy annuals that are generally started indoors, but can be planted outside and don’t mind the cooler temperature fluctuations of spring.
Warm-weather annuals or tender annuals thrive in the heat of summer, However, they are vulnerable and delicate when the thermometer trends downward. If they’re planted too early in the spring, for example, and there is a threat of a cold snap, they should be protected. Warm-weather annuals include vegetables and herbs, and flowers, like impatiens, marigolds, and petunias. The latter is considered a tender perennial in zones 9 to 11. Which brings us to tender perennials…

What is a tender perennial?
A tender perennial is a plant that will survive for more than one growing season (i.e. through the winter), but with some help in colder climates. In warm climates, these plants would be considered perennials.  Sometimes tender perennials are treated like annuals and are either pulled or left in the ground where it’s unlikely they’ll survive over the winter months. If you want to keep them from year to year, they need to be dug up and stored or moved indoors and grown like a houseplant. Tender perennials that can be dug up and stored include dahlias, calla lilies, and caladiums. Those that can be be kept indoors and grown as a houseplant through the winter include pelargoniums, begonias, coleus, and even veggies like peppers and tomatoes. Others, can be stored in a dormant state in a cool garage or basement.

caladium in a planter
Caladiums are tender annuals whose bulbs can be dug up in fall to be overwintered.
What is a biennial?
Now, to throw a bit of a curveball into the mix, there is also such a thing as a biennial plant. With these plants, it takes two years, or growing seasons, for the plant to complete its life cycle. In the first year, the plant will grow its roots, stems, and leaves. During the second year, the plant will grow flowers and/or fruit, and seeds, and then die off completely. Examples of biennials include some varieties of dianthus, parsley, kale, carrots,

biennial dianthus
I grew this biennial dianthus from seed. It flowered two years in a row and then the plant was done.
Why choose an annual vs perennial?
When searching for new plants, a good way to plan out the garden is to choose perennials for structure and four-season interest. They’re like the timeless investment pieces in a wardrobe that you can wear again and again. Once established, many have exceptional drought and heat tolerance, which helps them survive in extreme conditions. Perennial plants may come back each year, but depending on the size you purchase, they can take awhile to reach their full potential. Check your plant label carefully to see the eventual height and width of a perennial so you can plan your garden accordingly.

asters in a garden
When choosing an annual vs perennial plant, figure out what the plant’s purpose is going to be. Are you planting for structure, to attract pollinators, to provide multi-season interest, or all three! Long-term, more perennials will result in a more low-maintenance garden.
In the meantime, annuals are perfect for filling in those holes between perennial flowers and foliage. They’re also great for borders. And there are loads of annual options at the garden center for container gardening. Besides pots, I love to add annual flowers, like zinnias, to my raised beds. They attract bees and butterflies to pollinate the veggies, some make excellent cut flowers, and they look great.

When faced with all of the different soil mixes available online and in our favorite garden centers, deciding on garden soil vs potting soil can be a little confounding. After all, there are individual products for potting up orchids, African violets, cacti, succulents, and more. So, how do you tell them apart? And what potential benefits can be attributed to them? To find the answers—and figure out which growing medium might be best for your gardening project—it’s important to understand which ingredients are typically found in both garden soil and potting soil. Then you can fill your garden or container accordingly so the plants, seeds, and seedlings you dig in can thrive.



wheelbarrow with soil
As a general rule, garden soil is used in outdoor raised beds or mixed into traditional garden beds. Potting soils and mixes are often used when potting up outdoor container arrangements, potting (or re-potting) houseplants, and for seed-starting and plant propagation.
Why garden soil and potting soil are not interchangeable
Although you may see them referred to interchangeably, garden soil and potting soil are not actually the same thing. They each have different qualities which make them better suited for different uses. For instance, while potting soils are generally lightweight and sterile, garden soils are usually heavier and potentially teeming with life.

What is garden soil?
Used by itself or added to outdoor garden beds, garden soil is topsoil that has been amended with organic materials, like compost, worm castings, and aged manure. As for the topsoil it contains? If you were to dig a couple of feet down into the dirt, you’d find a dark-colored layer—the topsoil—in at least the first few inches. On its own, topsoil is used in landscaping projects like filling in low spots or establishing new lawns. It contains organic matter and, depending on its source, varying amounts of different particle sizes, including silt, sand, and clay.


garden soil delivery from a truck
While garden soil does come in bags, you can order large quantities for bigger garden projects. I try to calculate what I need based on all the areas where I’d like it to end up.
What is potting soil?
Potting soil is a standalone growing medium often used in seed-starting and container gardening. Potting soils may contain a base of garden soil, aged compost, or composted wood along with non-soil additives. Some of these extra ingredients add structure and support for plant roots. Others help to retain moisture or provide room for oxygen around developing plant roots.

an open bag of potting soil
Potting soils may contain a base of garden soil, aged compost, or composted wood along with non-soil additives, such as perlite, vermiculite, and peat moss or coconut coir.

Just to throw another wrench into things, unlike many potting soils, potting mixes—also known as soilless mixes—don’t contain soil. Instead, these are made up of non-soil additives, like peat moss, pine bark, and mined perlite and vermiculite. (Into organic gardening? Read potting mix labels carefully to make sure the ingredients meet your specific criteria.)

Ingredients in potting soil
Some of the most common ingredients you’ll find in potting soil include non-soil additives like perlite, vermiculite, peat moss, and coconut coir.

Perlite and vermiculite: Both perlite and vermiculite are naturally occurring minerals that are usually included in potting soils to help with soil structure, drainage, and aeration.
Peat moss: For its part, peat moss is another heavily used natural resource. Harvested from peat bogs, the material holds moisture well and improves the growing medium’s texture, too. (Concerned about peat? Keep reading for alternatives.)
Coconut coir: A byproduct of coconut harvesting, coconut coir is a fibrous material that comes from just below the coconut’s outer shell. Coir is a newer potting soil additive that also retains moisture really well.
Incidentally, when deciding on garden soil vs potting soil, some gardeners’ choices are influenced by sustainability issues. When left undisturbed, peat bogs hold onto large amounts of carbon. Upon harvest, that climate-changing carbon is released into the atmosphere. And, although it’s sometimes floated as a more sustainable option, coconut coir has its own limitations. Because the material is high in salts, coir requires a great deal of fresh water to process for use in gardening.

potting soil and containers
Bagged potting soil is formulated to retain moisture and promote aeration, but is more lightweight than garden soil.
Recently, gardeners and potting soil manufacturers alike have been experimenting with “greener,” non-soil additives. One promising possibility? PittMoss, a growing medium blend made from recycled paper fibers.

The components of garden soil
In part, the overall quality and characteristics of garden soil can vary depending on the ratio of silt, sand, and clay present in the topsoil it contains. That’s because clay soil, sandy soil, and loam soil each have different properties. (For example, while clay-heavy soils retain water and nutrients well, soils with higher amounts of sand will let go of moisture and nutrients more quickly.)

In addition to topsoil, garden soil can contain many different sources of organic matter. Some of these sources commonly include aged manure, well-rotted wood chips, finished compost, or worm castings.

adding garden soil to an existing garden
Garden soil contains a whole network of tiny, living creatures—soil microbes, like beneficial fungi and bacteria. As these microorganisms naturally break down organic matter in the soil, they increase the bioavailability of nutrients, helping plants to thrive.
The main differences between garden soil vs potting soil
Understanding the main differences between garden soil vs potting soil makes knowing which one to reach for much easier.

Garden soil

Rich in organic matter
Quality and characteristics vary depending on top soil and amendment types
Heavier than potting mixes
Contains range of macro and micronutrients, and beneficial microorganisms
May contain some weed seeds and plant pathogens
Retains moisture and nutrients
Provides good support for roots and top-heavy plants
Potting soil

Contains non-soil additives like peat moss and perlite
Uniform, lightweight texture
Sterile (contains no weed seeds or plant pathogens)
Provides no nutrients (unless fertilizer is added to the mix)
Doesn’t hold nutrients well
Retains moisture and facilitates drainage
Plant-specific mixes (with optimized pH levels) available
a garden soil vs potting soil inforgraphic
Here is a side-by-side comparison of the differences between garden soil and potting soil.
The power of beneficial microbes in garden soil
Unlike sterile, soilless mixes, garden soil contains a multitude of tiny, living creatures—soil microbes, including beneficial fungi, bacteria, and nematodes, among others. As these microorganisms naturally break down organic matter in the soil, they increase the bioavailability of nutrients. This, in turn, affords the plants we grow in that soil greater access to the micro and macronutrients they need in order to thrive. The community of microbes living in garden soil also helps to keep certain plant pests and pathogens in check.

Which option is best for starting seeds?
Potting soils made up of soilless ingredients, like perlite, vermiculite, and peat moss or coir, have been developed with seed starting in mind. They facilitate good drainage and aeration, they don’t contain weed seeds, and, because they’re sterile, you’re much less likely to lose new seedlings to disease. Potting soil pH levels also are optimal for seed starting.

Depending on their ingredients and the manufacturing processes used, some potting “soils”—as well as potting mixes and soilless mixes—do not contain the fungi or bacteria that are present in regular garden soil. It’s true that many soil-based microorganisms do have positive effects on nearby plants; however, some are the culprits behind soil-borne “damping-off,” “root rot,” and other diseases. These can ravage germinating seeds, small seedlings, and new plant cuttings.

soilless potting mix for seed starting
By starting seeds or transplanting fresh cuttings into a sterile growing medium, you’re less likely to lose your vulnerable new plants to soil-borne pathogens.
Potting mixes and soilless growing media also lack seeds from potentially competing plants. As a result, your new seedlings won’t have to share access to water, nutrients, and sunlight with weeds inadvertently popping up alongside them.

What should you use for container gardening?
Some gardeners have strong preferences when it comes to garden soil vs potting soil—particularly when growing plants in containers. In very large, outdoor pots, garden soil may be more economical.

Still, for indoor container gardens and greenhouse uses, you might want to choose potting soil since it’s less likely to include insect larvae that could hatch. If you do use potting soil in your containers, you may need to fertilize your plants more frequently unless you’ve used a fertilizer-added potting mix.

Which soil is better for making a raised bed vegetable garden?
When I give my talks about raised beds, soil is one of the most popular questions. My recommendations are always to purchase the best-quality soil you can afford. In this case, a garden soil delivery makes the most sense. Part sand, silt, and/or clay and heavily amended with organic ingredients like compost or aged manure, garden soil is a great source of slow-release nutrients. Heavier than potting mix, it also retains moisture better. I will top-dress the garden soil layer with more compost to add even more nutrients to the soil. And for deeper garden beds, I’ll add a layer of sticks and branches, or sod, to fill in the bottom, before adding the garden soil. This article goes into more detail on choosing soil for a raised bed.

soil in a new raised bed
Garden soil can be used to fill a new raised bed. It may be called triple mix or 50/50 blend. And despite it containing compost, I still like to top-dress a freshly filled raised bed with a few inches of compost.
Can potting soil be used as a soil amendment in the garden?
You can use potting soil as a soil amendment for especially problematic areas in your garden beds. Need help balancing out compaction from heavy clay soils? In a pinch, lightweight potting soil mixes can help to improve soil drainage and aeration. (Just keep in mind that any perlite or vermiculite that these products may contain won’t decompose in your garden.)

As you become acquainted with some of the most common ingredients found in these products, along with their benefits and drawbacks, you should be able to make better purchasing decisions. You might even begin mixing some of your own custom garden and potting soil blends, too.

As I work to get rid of my lawn in favor of growing more perennials and edible crops, meadow grasses are among some of the native plants I’ve been adding to the garden. Meadow plantings have become increasingly popular in the home landscape for plenty of good reasons. Once established, a meadow garden can provide food and habitat for songbirds and insects—particularly many kinds of butterflies and moths.


And there’s no need to mow meadow grass week after week, which frees up time and helps to reduce carbon emissions. What’s more, meadow grasses do a ton of heavy-lifting underground by slowing and filtering stormwater runoff. They’re often used in rain garden plans. Eventually, areas that have been converted into prairies also have healthier soil—not to mention that they’re simply lovely to look at year-round. In this article, I’m going to share some meadow grass options for your garden. Depending on your space, there are options for low-growing, medium, and tall grasses.


flowers and little bluestem meadow grass
After carefully considering your growing conditions and weighing your personal preferences, you can choose meadow grasses and sedges in a great range of colors, textures, sizes, and growth habits. Mix these with a smattering of wildflowers like butterfly weed and purple coneflower among others and, after a couple of growing seasons, your personalized meadow garden will be well on its way.
What are meadow grasses?
Meadow grasses are a mix of re-seeding annuals and perennial herbaceous plants that have long been used as livestock fodder. When grown in conjunction with one another in a pasture or grassland, these deep-rooting grasses, along with grass-like sedges and rushes, form a diverse, resilient plant community.

two heights of meadow grasses
With deeper roots and more resilience, meadow grasses are a better option than traditional turf grass.

How meadow grasses are different from turf grasses
Unlike meadow grasses, most turf grasses require more time and attention from us to survive. Because they’re naturally anchored much more deeply within the soil, meadow grasses are better protected against the heat, drought, pests, and weeds which plague ordinary lawns. They’re also much better at sequestering carbon—an environmental bonus for all of us.

Warm-season grasses vs cool-season meadow grasses
Just as some of the veggies we plant in our gardens prefer certain soil temperatures, so, too, do native grasses. For instance, cool-season meadow grasses like Canada wild rye, Virginia wild rye, and assorted fescues will grow quickly earlier in the season when daytime temperatures are in the 60- to-70-degree Fahrenheit zone and the ground is still relatively cool. But once those pleasant spring days get hotter and drier, cool-season grass typically goes dormant.

Big bluestem 'Blackhawks' (Andropogon gerardii) 
Big bluestem, like ‘Blackhawks’, which is shown here, is an example of a warm-season grass. It doesn’t mind the summer heat and dry conditions. Photo courtesy of Walters Gardens Inc.
Deeply rooted and often clumping in habit, most warm-season grass, such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and prairie dropseed, thrives in the heat of very late spring and summer.


Advantages of including native grasses in a garden
The root systems of mature native grasses can be surprisingly deep. This helps these tough beauties to hang on during periods of extreme weather and drought which, in turn, mitigates soil erosion. And, once established, neither the matting nor the clumping meadow grasses are much bothered by insect pests or weeds.

Countless birds are attracted to native grasses for their nutritious seeds and the cover they provide. And, mix native grasses with milkweed, New England asters, goldenrod, and other nectar-rich flowers, and you’ve got a butterfly paradise.

Switchgrass 'Shenandoah' (Panicum virgatum) and perennial sunflowers
In home gardens, as gardeners look for options to replace traditional turf grass, meadow plantings are becoming increasingly popular because of their low-maintenance nature, but also because of the valuable pollinators and wildlife they attract.
Types of meadow grasses
From dainty clumping varieties to bold, eight-foot-tall sprays, there are meadow grasses to suit a mix of site conditions. While some of these natives flourish in full sun, plenty of others, such as northern river oats, will tolerate some degree of shade.

Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) in a container
Different meadow grasses have different characteristics. This upright nature of this switchgrass makes it an ideal choice for a container.
As for their look and feel, varieties like switchgrass have a very rigid, upright posture while others—think prairie dropseed and buffalo grass—look relaxed enough to serve as groundcovers. There are also shorter-lived, bunching grasses which, after a few years, may be supplanted by more aggressive, neighboring grasses. (These more dominant meadow grasses can spread thanks to a profusion of seeds or, in some cases, a robust tangle of underground runners.)

Short grasses for a meadow
Although sedges aren’t technically grasses, these grass-like plants do make wonderful, short-statured additions to meadow gardens. Here are some to consider, as well as a couple of “real grass” suggestions.

Plains oval sedge (Carex brevior): Plains oval sedge remains under 12 inches high with coarse, upright tufts of blades. It adapts to sun or part shade, and wet or dry soils.
Ivory sedge (Carex eburnea): Ivory sedge measures just six to eight inches tall with dense clumps of soft leaves that have a mop-like appearance.
Pennsylvania sedge (Carex pensylvanica): Pennsylvania sedge stays low and has fine-textured foliage, making it a great lawn alternative that does not require mowing.
The best meadow grasses for native plantings include Pennsylvania sedge (Carex Pensylvanica)
Pennsylvania sedge is perfect for small-space gardens—it only reaches about six to 12 inches in height. It works well as a groundcover, but be aware that it can spread aggressively via rhizomes.
Prairie dropseed (Sporobolus heterolepis): This is a true grass with pretty, cascading foliage that tops out at about three feet tall. However it does have a tendency to remain flopped over and low to the ground. Prairie dropseed blooms beginning in late summer and continues through the fall.
Meadow grasses: Prairie dropseed (Sporobolus heterolepis)
If you’re looking for a meadow grass for a full-sun area of the garden, prairie dropseed is a great low-growing option that doesn’t spread easily.
Sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula): This is another of the true meadow grasses, which stays nice and compact. The plant’s seed spikelets dangle daintily off of one side of each stalk, as if they were riding sidesaddle, and the grass’s reddish-orange florets show up in late summer.
Medium-height meadow grasses
Purple lovegrass (Eragrostis pectinacea): Purple lovegrass is a medium-height plant that is perfect for working in near shorter grass varieties. It reaches about two feet in height and performs best in moderately moist to dry soils.
Purple love grass (Eragrostis spectabilis)
Purple lovegrass is a great example of those dreamy, wispy grasses that provide gorgeous color in the garden. The plant itself is tough. It is drought tolerant and can withstand poor soils.
June grass (Koeleria macrantha): The height of June grass is similar to purple lovegrass, but it prefers dry conditions.
Northern sea oats (Chasmanthium latifolium): Also known as “river oats,” this grass grows to about three feet high. It is a very forgiving grass that is shade-tolerant and likes “wet feet.”
Northern sea oats - one of the best meadow grasses for gardens
Northern sea oats features foliage that is more flat in nature, and the pretty seed heads can be dried for arrangements, while also providing year-round interest if you leave them in the garden.
Bottlebrush grass (Elymus hystrix): Another shade-tolerant, medium-height grass, bottlebrush can grow up to four feet tall with a habit that’s not as bushy as other meadow grasses.
Little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium): Three-to-four-foot high clumps and fluffy seed heads mix especially well with wildflowers; a late-summer bloomer, it prefers drier soil conditions.
little bluestem grass
Little bluestem grass makes for a nice border plant, as long as there isn’t anything behind it.
Blue grama grass (Bouteloua gracilis): A mature height of two to three feet with sideways facing flowers, blue grama grass is drought resistant and easy to grow from seed.
Tall grasses for a meadow planting
Tall meadow grasses can lend real structure and drama to the landscape. Each of these can reach between four and six feet at maturity. These varieties work really well when placed behind shorter grasses or when mixed in with taller wildflowers, such as Joe-Pye weed. Here are some of my favorite tall meadow grasses.

Virginia wild rye (Elymus virginicus): Virginia wild rye produces stiff, foxtail-like blooms and reaches up to four feet tall. It blooms earlier in the season than most other meadow grasses.
Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum): Switchgrass has bluish-green foliage, airy late-summer blooms, and tremendous fall color. This fine-textured grass is clump-forming and grows to five or six feet.
Switchgrass 'Shenandoah'
Switchgrass (pictured here is ‘Shenandoah’) is a variety that provides great multi-season color and visual interest in the garden.
Indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans): This bunching grass grows from six to eight feet tall with soft, plume-like flowers that stand on tall stems above the leaves late in the season.
Indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans)
Indian grass can reach up to eight feet tall, a nice option for a privacy “screen.” Photo courtesy of Walters Gardens, Inc.
Big bluestem (Andropogon gerardi): Depending on your growing conditions, big bluestem can grow to heights of six to eight feet. It turns a wonderful color in fall.
Big bluestem grass
Big bluestem grass is a warm-season variety of meadow grass with very deep roots.
Provided you have enough space, large plantings of a mixture of tall meadow grasses is well worth considering. Changing to shades of orange, copper, and bronze in the fall, their seed heads nodding with the wind, tall grasses provide a high degree of winter interest. (Just keep in mind that many of these heavy hitters are also potentially heavy seed spreaders!)

How to use grasses in a backyard meadow design
When working with meadow grasses, landscape designers first try to match site characteristics with specific plant needs. If you’re thinking about incorporating native grasses into a backyard meadow design, here are some important factors to consider:

Light: How many hours of direct sunlight does the area get? How shady are your shadiest spots? Remember, different meadow grasses will tolerate varying degrees of shade.
Stormwater runoff and soil drainage: Which areas, if any, tend to develop standing water? Which spots remain dry?
Sensitive areas: The slope of your land and quality of your soil can contribute to soil erosion. Make special note of areas with topsoil loss and install larger swaths of erosion-controlling meadow grasses here.
Uses for the land: Do you still need some areas for kids or pets to play? You might choose to fill these in with repeating clumps of extra-tough, low-growing native grasses or sedges. Need a windbreak or a privacy screen? Try a mix of tall grasses or use multiple plantings of a single tall variety.
Knowing what your space requires, such as mostly shade-lovers, plants that prefer dry land, etc., will help you to zero in on the best mix of grasses for you.

Growing from seeds, plugs, or larger plants
While growing a meadow garden from seed is the least costly route, it can take a few years to really fill in and become established. You can plant meadow grass seed mix directly over an existing lawn or over cleared areas. Ideally, you should plant seeds in late fall, since some grasses require cold weather to help jumpstart germination when conditions are just right. Adding a temporary “nurse crop” of annual oats or rye along with your native grass mix will help keep your seeds in place—and keep competing weeds at bay. After fall sowing, you’ll want to begin looking for tiny native grass shoots in the spring.

Blue grama 'Bouteloua gracilis' grass
Depending on your patience and budget, you can grow native grasses from seed, plugs, or more established plants. Pictured here is blue grama (Bouteloua gracilis).
Planting native grass plugs or larger, container-grown grasses is a much faster—albeit more expensive—method. Most varieties are best planted in early spring. You’ll need to space and dig individual holes for each, but they will take off much more quickly than direct-seeded areas will. Be sure to read how much a grass will spread when it reaches maturity, so you know how much space to leave between plants.

Caring for meadow grasses
Meadow grasses will need the most attention from you within their first couple of years. Early steps you’ll need to take include watering young plug and container plants after planting until they’ve successfully rooted in your soil (read plant tags and seed packets carefully). You must also cut back any invading weeds you notice growing amongst your new grass shoots so that these don’t have the chance to set—and spread!—their seed.

cutting back meadow grasses
Once plants are established, you only need to cut them back once a year.
As for long-term maintenance, keep any invasive shrub or tree growth you notice cut back. Once your meadow is well-established, you need only mow or cut it down it once annually in very early spring.

When it comes to finding gifts for garden lovers, it can be tricky to know what to purchase. A seasoned green thumb likely has a pretty good collection of tools by now. A novice gardener is still probably in acquiring mode, deciding what works best for them. All gardeners are different and will have their go-tos. But sometimes it’s helpful to choose items you’ve fallen in love with—or one a fellow gardener has discovered is invaluable—that you know someone else would appreciate. In this article, I’m going to share some of our Savvy Gardening favorites, as well as some quick tips on why they make a thoughtful gift.


This curated list of the best gifts for garden lovers is featured thanks to the sponsorship of Gardener’s Supply Company (GSC), an employee-owned company that designs many of the products they sell.

Some advice when choosing gifts for garden lovers
When you’re trying to narrow down gift ideas for a gardening enthusiast, consider the following advice:


Look for quality. You want a product that is going to stand the test of time and not break, rip, or fall apart after just a couple of uses.
Check for warranties and guarantees. Gardener’s Supply Company, for example, places a 100% guarantee on all their products. The company will exchange or refund a product that doesn’t meet a gardener’s expectations or work as it was expected to.
Choose an item for its usefulness over something that is gimmicky.
When deciding what to buy, think of something that you would use in your own garden that has made your life easier.
Deluxe Galvanized Seed Saver Kit
My seeds used to be a bit of a disaster, until I started putting them all in categorized ziplock bags—tomatoes, beans, melons, etc. But they were still all tossed into a a few bins in a disorganized heap. Enter this Deluxe Galvanized Seed Saver Kit. It is the Cadillac of seed packet organization. Designed by GSC, it features five compartments that are the width of most seed packets.

Handy dividers help you to categorize the compartments. I organized mine by vegetable, but I’m contemplating further categorizing for succession planting. There are six dividers that come with the container, but you can order more separately.

Gardener's Supply Company Deluxe Galvanized Seed Saver Kit
I divided my seed packets by flowers, herbs, root vegetables, etc. But you could get more granular with some of your categories—or choose a whole other way to file your seed packets. There is also so much space, you could store some plant markers and a Sharpie in there, too.
If you’re a seed saver, there are 36 glassine envelopes. (I have to admit, I had to look up the definition of glassine: smooth and glossy paper that is air, water, and grease resistant.) So these special envelopes keep seeds dry. The galvanized steel container with handles also keeps everything inside dry. It keeps rodents out, too, if you happen to leave it in the garden or maybe a shed where pests could be a problem.

Deluxe Seed Saver Kit closed
The dimensions of this deluxe box with a hinged lid are 19-3/4” x 8-1/4” x 6-1/2”. If space is an issue, there is a smaller version that would also make the perfect gift. It is a mere 8″ x 6-1/2″ x 6-3/4″.
Copper Indoor Watering Can

The Copper Indoor Watering Can is so chic, you can display it on a shelf when it’s not in use. Made of copper-plated steel, it holds three quarts of water, making it easy to roam from room to room, watering all your houseplants. What I love about the handle is the way it’s attached from the top and then it curves around to the bottom, so I can hold it with two hands and control how much water my plants get.

Gardener's Supply Company Copper Indoor Watering Can
The well-designed handle of this copper watering can makes it a two-hander for ease of pouring. It’s also so gorgeous you’ll want to put it on display!
The spout itself is slender and curved, which is perfect for getting between the leaves and making sure the water hits the soil and doesn’t splash on the table or ground around the plant. This also helps prevent the water from damaging the plant’s leaves because the water is directed right into the pot. The watering can is also handy to use for outdoor containers for the same reasons. I can see it displayed on one of those dreamy potting benches, surrounded by terracotta pots, plant tags, and fancy twine. It’s become a part of my indoor decor, proudly sitting on a shelf, waiting to water.

Gardener’s Lifetime Hori Hori Knife
The one tool that follows me around the yard is my Gardener’s Lifetime Hori Hori knife. I use it for so many different tasks. It helps to dig out tough weeds that want to stay put. I use it as a trowel to make holes for new plants, making the task much easier in areas with hard-packed soil. I use the one side when I need a knife to harvest a veggie with a thick stem, like squash and cabbage. It comes in very handy in the fall when I’m taking my containers apart. Everything usually ends up pretty root bound, so the knife allows me to cut through everything to loosen the plants and then store my pots away for the winter. With my urn, it allows me to remove the roots for the next season’s arrangement. I also use it for bulb and garlic planting.

Gardener's Lifetime hori hori knife
I use my hori hori knife for a multitude of gardening tasks, including weeding, planting garlic, cutting root-bound plants out of pots at the end of the season, and harvesting.

This soil knife is hand-forged in Holland by DeWit Garden Tools. It uses an original Japanese design and is made from high-carbon Swedish boron steel. The anti-fatigue handle is rounded for comfort. When you hold it, you can tell this is a durable tool that’s made to last.

Lifetime Long Handle Double Tool
Now this is a special, two-for-one tool that’s a wonderful addition to any list of gifts for garden lovers. The Gardener’s Lifetime Long-Handled Double Tool, which is a GSC exclusive with a lifetime guarantee, is both a hoe and a weeder. Use it in flower beds and the vegetable garden for various tasks.

Gardener's Lifetime Long-Handled Double Tool
This multi-purpose tool has a long handle that helps to prevent back strain when using it as a weeder or cultivator.
This is another tool carefully made by DeWit Garden Tools in Holland. A long handle made from European ash hardwood allows you to garden more comfortably, moving dirt and weeding from a more upright position, instead of bending over. This is meant to prevent back strain. It is attached to a well-secured blade that is hand-forged from high-carbon Swedish boron steel.

Galvanized Garden Tool Storage Box
Sometimes it’s nice to have certain garden gear at your fingertips. My go-tos include a small pair of pruners, a hori hori knife, and gardening gloves. The GSC-designed Galvanized Garden Tool Storage Box can be attached to a raised bed, fence, or shed—whatever location makes a convenient spot for a small stash of gear.

GSC Galvanized Garden Tool Storage Box
The Galvanized Garden Tool Storage Box allows you to dash out to the garden to do quick tasks without worrying about the hassle of digging out a couple of essential tools and accessories for a garage or shed.
This box is made of galvanized steel, so it doesn’t mind being exposed to the elements. It won’t rust and the lid is carefully designed to prevent leaks. The dimensions are 16.75″ x 6.5″ x 11.5″. And if we’re talking about protecting what’s inside, this would also make a stellar mailbox!

Miracle Fiber Rose Gloves
One thing a gardener can never have enough of is gardening gloves. These carefully made rose gloves are special for a variety of reasons. With my first home, I inherited an overgrown, thorny rosebush. Every time I tried to trim dead canes and do any type of pruning, I was cut by angry thorns. The rose gloves gifted to me were a lifesaver (or hand saver!). And although they are called rose gloves, I use mine for so many more tasks in the garden. They come in handy for pulling out prickly weeds and for pruning other trees and shrubs. Cedars, for example, can irritate my skin, so if I’m trimming branches or working near them, I will protect my arms with the gauntlets that rose gloves provide.

GSC Miracle Fiber Rose Gloves
Rose gloves are a great gift because they can be used for several gardening tasks. Their sturdy construction and materials protect both your arms and hands.
This pair is described as Miracle Fiber Rose Gloves. They are made from breathable synthetic suede and have padded palms. You can tell when you put them on they’re tough, but they’re also very comfortable to work in, making it comfortable to use pruners and weed. A helpful size chart explains how to measure the length and width of your hands for the perfect fit. And you can throw them in the washing machine.

2′ x 8′ Arch Trellis for Planter Boxes
If you’re looking for a showstopper gift, this trellis is a pretty grand garden accessory. The 2′ x 8′ Arch Trellis for Planter Boxes is strong enough to support squash vines laden with fruit. But it also would look pretty stellar with other climbing veggies, like beans. Growing vegetables vertically leaves space in the garden for other crops. Another option is to train flowering vines up and over, so you have a bloom-filled archway in the garden.

GSC 2' x 8' Arch Trellis
Jessica attached the Arch Trellis to her existing Elevated Planter Box. She has trained mandevilla to climb the side.
What’s great about this trellis is that it fits easily with existing GSC products. You can attach it to one structure—either GSC’s 2’ x 8’ Planter Box or Elevated Raised Bed. Or, use it to create an arch over two of GSC’s 2’ x 8’ x 4’ Elevated Planter Boxes or Elevated Raised Beds.

If you’re not sure whether the gift recipient has one of these structures, there are other interesting trellis options to browse on the GSC website.

Closeup attaching the arch trellis
This arch trellis is very easy to install. Simply pop the caps off each corner and slide the trellis “feet” in.
This concludes our current list of gifts for garden lovers, which covers a range of sizes and price points. A big thank you to Gardener’s Supply Company, for sponsoring this article and allowing us to share some of our favorite gift ideas, including tested products that we use ourselves in our gardens.

Do you still have spaces in your vegetable garden where spring-planted crops, like peas and root vegetables were pulled—or garlic? As you wait for your summer garden (tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, etc.) to mature, think ahead to fall harvests and make a plan for succession planting. There are lots of vegetables you can still plant in August. You just need to think ahead a little. In this article, I’m going to share some of my favorite veggies to sow in my Southern Ontario garden (about USDA zone 6a), and some tips for succession planting.


The earlier you sow in August the better for some of these crops, so you can maximize their growing time before temperatures start to drop. As the days become shorter, plant growth will start to slow, too. Some years, if I’m away on vacation or busy, I’ve bent the rules a bit (i.e. planting a little later) and still ended up with some reasonable harvests. But with fall vegetable gardening, much will also depend on factors like the weather and where your garden is located. I have a couple of planting spots that are like little microclimates, so I’m able to test the limits of when I plant and how long certain plants will survive through the fall.


lettuce and cilantro are among the vegetables you can plant in August. Pictured is lettuce and cilantro in October
August-planted cilantro and lettuce thriving in my vertical raised bed in October. The garden is in full sun for part of the day on my driveway, so it gets a bit of heat from the warmth of the concrete.
Choosing your vegetables to plant in August
Before we get into which vegetables to plant in August, here are some things to keep in mind:

Amend your soil: Pulling plants out of your garden always removes a bit of soil, but the plants themselves have absorbed the nutrients. Amend your garden with an inch or two of fresh compost before succession planting.
Read the seed packet carefully: “Days to maturity” is the key phrase you need to look for. Count backwards from your region’s frost date in the fall to see if your plants will have an opportunity to grow before the temperatures really start to dip.
Day-length: As the days get shorter and darker in September and October, plant growth slows. It’s essential to account for this slower growth when you time the planting of fall crops and I add an extra 7 to 10 days to the ‘days to maturity’ listed on seed packets. If a turnip variety takes 40 days to go from seed to harvest, assume it needs closer to 50 days to mature.
Plan ahead: If you think ahead, start some of these seeds under grow lights (the ones that don’t need to be direct sown), so they have even more of a head start in the garden. This is a good idea for lettuces, because many are slow to germinate in hot, dry soil. Also, make note to include extra seeds for some of these crops when you’re making your winter seed order.
Nurture your seeds: Summer soil conditions (heat and dryness) can make it tricky for seeds to germinate. Try to keep the soil moisture consistent where newly sown seeds are planted, using the light spray nozzle on your hose, or a watering can. If you’re deep watering the rest of your garden, remember to check the bare soil areas on the days in between. And avoid deep watering these areas as you don’t want the seeds to wash away.

My favorite vegetables to plant in August
Here are a few of the veggies I sow in my summer garden.

Turnips
I remember how brilliant I felt when I first thought to sow turnip seeds in the space where I had pulled out my garlic. I shared some of my favorite turnips to grow in an article, including succulent Japanese turnips. They are so delicious and can be picked when they’re the size of a walnut or ping pong ball!

'Silky Sweet' turnip
‘Silky Sweet’ is probably my favorite turnip variety. You can pick them when they’re small and enjoy them raw or cooked.
Baby kale
Kale is another favorite green that I use in salads and stir fries, and bake into crispy chips. Most of my spring-planted kale plants are a good size by fall, so I appreciate the tender leaves of baby kale that I sow in the summer. Floating row cover protects my kale crops when temperatures really start to dip—though kale doesn’t mind a touch of frost. I’ve harvested well into November. I’ve also written about growing kale indoors if you’d really like to extend your season.

Container curls kale
Even though you may have mature kale plants by the fall, baby kale is fun to grow and more tender for salads.

Beets
If you’d like to grow beets, look for early beet varieties, like ‘Chioggia’ and Detroit Dark Red. If things don’t go according to plan, and you’re left with minuscule beets, you can still enjoy the leafy greens.

Cilantro
Cilantro is one of those frustrating crops that bolt early in the late spring/early summer. I try to plant slow-to-bolt varieties, and give them a bit of shade, but they still go to seed too soon for my liking. I’ll let the seed pods open into the raised beds where they are planted. But I’ll also sow seeds in early August for guaranteed fall enjoyment.

cilantro growing in a vertical raised bed
I try to grow as much cilantro as possible. I’ll sow seeds later in August for a fall crop.
Bok choy
Bok choy, in my opinion, is a stir fry superstar. I use a lot of it in my cooking, so I am always eager to plant some in August. Spring-sown crops can bolt quickly if there is a sudden hot spell, but in the fall, these leafy greens are cold tolerant. I love mini varieties, like ‘Toy Choy’ and ‘Asian Delight’.

'Asian Delight' bok choy
‘Asian Delight’ bok choy is a favorite variety. It’s pretty quick growing, and I enjoy the flavor in stirfries.
Radishes
Radishes are a quick-growing crop that can mature in as little as 21 days. They don’t love the hot weather, so you can wait until late summer—end of August, or even into September—to plant them and enjoy in early fall.

Mizuna
Mizuna is a mustard green that’s a new favorite. It’s got a bit of bite, and is delicious tossed into salads with other greens. Start sowing seeds for red varieties in August, knowing you can also use them as ornamental foliage in your fall containers.

'Miz America' mizuna
‘Miz America’ mizuna is a quick-growing salad “green” that adds a bit of bite to salads.
Salad greens
Speaking of salads, it only takes about four to five weeks before you can begin to snip cut-and-come-again lettuces. I love oak leaf varieties and ‘Buttercrunch’. Lettuce seeds can be sown in late August and you can harvest the leaves through the first frost. Arugula is another fast-growing green that can be sown towards the end of August into early September. (It’s also a little fussy about the heat.) I love arugula in salads, but also as a pizza topping!

lettuce in a raised bed
Salad greens are a staple in my late-summer garden. I love planting tons of seeds so I can snip different varieties for as long as possible.
Carrots
Carrot seeds can be sown in late July, early August. A favorite is the round ‘Romeo’ variety that I’ve planted in early in August with success. You can also deep mulch carrots for winter harvests if you start them soon enough.


